PONTIFICAL COMMISSIONECCLESIA DEI

INSTRUCTIONON THE APPLICATION OF THE APOSTOLIC LETTERSUMMORUM PONTIFICUMOF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVIGIVENMOTU PROPRIO

I.Introduction

1. The Apostolic LetterSummorum Pontificumof the Sovereign PontiffBenedict XVIgivenMotu Proprioon 7 July 2007, which came into effect on 14 September 2007, has made the richness of the Roman Liturgy more accessible to the Universal Church.

2. With this Motu Proprio, the Holy Father PopeBenedict XVIpromulgated a universal law for the Church, intended to establish new regulations for the use of the Roman Liturgy in effect in 1962.

3. The Holy Father, having recalled the concern of the Sovereign Pontiffs in caring for the Sacred Liturgy and in their recognition of liturgical books, reaffirms the traditional principle, recognised from time immemorial and necessary to be maintained into the future, that “each particular Church must be in accord with the universal Church not only regarding the doctrine of the faith and sacramental signs, but also as to the usages universally handed down by apostolic and unbroken tradition. These are to be maintained not only so that errors may be avoided, but also so that the faith may be passed on in its integrity, since the Church's rule of prayer(lex orandi)corresponds to her rule of belief(lex credendi).”[1]

4. The Holy Father recalls also those Roman Pontiffs who, in a particular way, were notable in this task, specifically Saint Gregory the Great and Saint Pius V. The Holy Father stresses moreover that, among the sacred liturgical books, theMissale Romanumhas enjoyed a particular prominence in history, and was kept up to date throughout the centuries until the time ofBlessed Pope John XXIII. Subsequently in 1970, following the liturgical reform after theSecond Vatican Council, Pope Paul VI approved for the Church of the Latin rite a new Missal, which was then translated into various languages. In the year 2000, Pope John Paul II promulgated the third edition of this Missal.

5. Many of the faithful, formed in the spirit of the liturgical forms prior to theSecond Vatican Council, expressed a lively desire to maintain the ancient tradition. For this reason,Pope John Paul IIwith a special IndultQuattuor abhinc annosissued in 1984 by the Congregation for Divine Worship, granted the faculty under certain conditions to restore the use of the Missal promulgated byBlessed Pope John XXIII. Subsequently, Pope John Paul II, with the Motu ProprioEcclesia Deiof 1988, exhorted the Bishops to be generous in granting such a faculty for all the faithful who requested it. Pope Benedict continues this policy with the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificumregarding certain essential criteria for theUsus Antiquiorof the Roman Rite, which are recalled here.

6. The Roman Missal promulgated by Pope Paul VI and the last edition prepared underPope John XXIII, are two forms of the Roman Liturgy, defined respectively asordinariaandextraordinaria: they are two usages of the one Roman Rite, one alongside the other. Both are the expression of the samelex orandiof the Church. On account of its venerable and ancient use, theforma extraordinariais to be maintained with appropriate honor.

7. The Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificumwas accompanied by a letter from the Holy Father to Bishops, with the same date as the Motu Proprio (7 July 2007). This letter gave further explanations regarding the appropriateness and the need for the Motu Proprio; it was a matter of overcoming a lacuna by providing new norms for the use of the Roman Liturgy of 1962. Such norms were needed particularly on account of the fact that, when the new Missal had been introduced under Pope Paul VI, it had not seemed necessary to issue guidelines regulating the use of the 1962 Liturgy. By reason of the increase in the number of those asking to be able to use theforma extraordinaria,it has become necessary to provide certain norms in this area.

Among the statements of the Holy Father was the following: “There is no contradiction between the two editions of the Roman Missal. In the history of the Liturgy growth and progress are found, but not a rupture. What was sacred for prior generations, remains sacred and great for us as well, and cannot be suddenly prohibited altogether or even judged harmful.”[2]

8. The Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificumconstitutes an important expression of the Magisterium of the Roman Pontiff and of hismunusof regulating and ordering the Church’s Sacred Liturgy.[3]The Motu Proprio manifests his solicitude as Vicar of Christ and Supreme Pastor of the Universal Church,[4]and has the aim of:

a. offering to all the faithful the Roman Liturgy in theUsus Antiquior,considered as a precious treasure to be preserved;b. effectively guaranteeing and ensuring the use of theforma extraordinariafor all who ask for it, given that the use of the 1962 Roman Liturgy is a faculty generously granted for the good of the faithful and therefore is to be interpreted in a sense favourable to the faithful who are its principal addressees;c. promoting reconciliation at the heart of the Church.

a. offering to all the faithful the Roman Liturgy in theUsus Antiquior,considered as a precious treasure to be preserved;

b. effectively guaranteeing and ensuring the use of theforma extraordinariafor all who ask for it, given that the use of the 1962 Roman Liturgy is a faculty generously granted for the good of the faithful and therefore is to be interpreted in a sense favourable to the faithful who are its principal addressees;

c. promoting reconciliation at the heart of the Church.

II.The Responsibilitiesof the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Dei

9. The Sovereign Pontiff has conferred upon the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Deiordinary vicarious power for the matters within its competence, in a particular way for monitoring the observance and application of the provisions of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum(cf. art. 12).

10. § 1. The Pontifical Commission exercises this power, beyond the faculties previously granted byPope John Paul IIand confirmed byPope Benedict XVI(cf. Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum, artt. 11-12), also by means of the power to decide upon recourses legitimately sent to it, as hierarchical Superior, against any possible singular administrative provision of an Ordinary which appears to be contrary to the Motu Proprio.

§ 2. The decrees by which the Pontifical Commission decides recourses may be challengedad normam iurisbefore the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura.

11. After having received the approval from the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Deiwill have the task of looking after future editions of liturgical texts pertaining to theforma extraordinariaof the Roman Rite.

III.Specific Norms

12. Following upon the inquiry made among the Bishops of the world, and with the desire to guarantee the proper interpretation and the correct application of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum,this Pontifical Commission, by virtue of the authority granted to it and the faculties which it enjoys, issues this Instruction according to can. 34 of theCode of Canon Law.

The Competence of Diocesan Bishops

13. Diocesan Bishops, according to Canon Law, are to monitor liturgical matters in order to guarantee the common good and to ensure that everything is proceeding in peace and serenity in their Dioceses[5], always in agreement with themensof the Holy Father clearly expressed by the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum.[6]In cases of controversy or well-founded doubt about the celebration in theforma extraordinaria, the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Deiwill adjudicate.

14. It is the task of the Diocesan Bishop to undertake all necessary measures to ensure respect for theforma extraordinariaof the Roman Rite, according to the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum.

Thecoetus fidelium(cf. Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum,art. 5 § 1)

15. Acoetus fidelium(“group of the faithful”) can be said to bestabiliter existens(“existing in a stable manner”), according to the sense of art. 5 § 1 of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum,when it is constituted by some people of an individual parish who, even after the publication of the Motu Proprio, come together by reason of their veneration for the Liturgy in theUsus Antiquior,and who ask that it might be celebrated in the parish church or in an oratory or chapel; such acoetus(“group”) can also be composed of persons coming from different parishes or dioceses, who gather together in a specific parish church or in an oratory or chapel for this purpose.

16. In the case of a priest who presents himself occasionally in a parish church or an oratory with some faithful, and wishes to celebrate in theforma extraordinaria, as foreseen by articles 2 and 4 of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum, the pastor or rector of the church, or the priest responsible, is to permit such a celebration, while respecting the schedule of liturgical celebrations in that same church.

17. § 1. In deciding individual cases, the pastor or the rector, or the priest responsible for a church, is to be guided by his own prudence, motivated by pastoral zeal and a spirit of generous welcome.

§ 2. In cases of groups which are quite small, they may approach the Ordinary of the place to identify a church in which these faithful may be able to come together for such celebrations, in order to ensure easier participation and a more worthy celebration of the Holy Mass.

18. Even in sanctuaries and places of pilgrimage the possibility to celebrate in theforma extraordinariais to be offered to groups of pilgrims who request it (cf. Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum, art. 5 § 3), if there is a qualified priest.

19. The faithful who ask for the celebration of theforma extraordinariamust not in any way support or belong to groups which show themselves to be against the validity or legitimacy of the Holy Mass or the Sacraments celebrated in theforma ordinariaor against the Roman Pontiff as Supreme Pastor of the Universal Church.

Sacerdos idoneus(“Qualified Priest”)(cf. Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum, art 5 § 4)

20. With respect to the question of the necessary requirements for a priest to be heldidoneus(“qualified”) to celebrate in theforma extraordinaria, the following is hereby stated:

a. Every Catholic priest who is not impeded by Canon Law[7]is to be consideredidoneus(“qualified”) for the celebration of the Holy Mass in theforma extraordinaria.b. Regarding the use of the Latin language, a basic knowledge is necessary, allowing the priest to pronounce the words correctly and understand their meaning.c. Regarding knowledge of the execution of the Rite, priests are presumed to be qualified who present themselves spontaneously to celebrate theforma extraordinaria, and have celebrated it previously.

a. Every Catholic priest who is not impeded by Canon Law[7]is to be consideredidoneus(“qualified”) for the celebration of the Holy Mass in theforma extraordinaria.

b. Regarding the use of the Latin language, a basic knowledge is necessary, allowing the priest to pronounce the words correctly and understand their meaning.

c. Regarding knowledge of the execution of the Rite, priests are presumed to be qualified who present themselves spontaneously to celebrate theforma extraordinaria, and have celebrated it previously.

21. Ordinaries are asked to offer their clergy the possibility of acquiring adequate preparation for celebrations in theforma extraordinaria.This applies also to Seminaries, where future priests should be given proper formation, including study of Latin[8]and, where pastoral needs suggest it, the opportunity to learn theforma extraordinariaof the Roman Rite.

22. In Dioceses without qualified priests, Diocesan Bishops can request assistance from priests of the Institutes erected by the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Dei,either to the celebrate theforma extraordinariaor to teach others how to celebrate it.

23. The faculty to celebratesine populo(or with the participation of only one minister) in theforma extraordinariaof the Roman Rite is given by the Motu Proprio to all priests, whether secular or religious (cf. Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum, art. 2). For such celebrations therefore, priests, by provision of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum,do not require any special permission from their Ordinaries or superiors.

Liturgical and Ecclesiastical Discipline

24. The liturgical books of theforma extraordinariaare to be used as they are. All those who wish to celebrate according to theforma extraordinariaof the Roman Rite must know the pertinent rubrics and are obliged to follow them correctly.

25. New saints and certain of the new prefaces can and ought to be inserted into the 1962 Missal[9], according to provisions which will be indicated subsequently.

26. As foreseen by article 6 of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum, the readings of the Holy Mass of the Missal of 1962 can be proclaimed either solely in the Latin language, or in Latin followed by the vernacular or, in Low Masses, solely in the vernacular.

27. With regard to the disciplinary norms connected to celebration, the ecclesiastical discipline contained in the Code of Canon Law of 1983 applies.

28. Furthermore, by virtue of its character of special law, within its own area, the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificumderogates from those provisions of law, connected with the sacred Rites, promulgated from 1962 onwards and incompatible with the rubrics of the liturgical books in effect in 1962.

Confirmation and Holy Orders

29. Permission to use the older formula for the rite of Confirmation was confirmed by the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificum(cf. art. 9 § 2). Therefore, in theforma extraordinaria, it is not necessary to use the newer formula of Pope Paul VI as found in theOrdo Confirmationis.

30. As regards tonsure, minor orders and the subdiaconate, the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificumdoes not introduce any change in the discipline of theCode of Canon Lawof 1983; consequently, in Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life which are under the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Dei, one who has made solemn profession or who has been definitively incorporated into a clerical institute of apostolic life, becomes incardinated as a cleric in the institute or society upon ordination to the diaconate, in accordance with canon 266 § 2 of theCode of Canon Law.

31. Only in Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life which are under the Pontifical CommissionEcclesia Dei,and in those which use the liturgical books of theforma extraordinaria,is the use of thePontificale Romanumof 1962 for the conferral of minor and major orders permitted.

Breviarium Romanum

32. Art. 9 § 3 of the Motu ProprioSummorum Pontificumgives clerics the faculty to use theBreviarium Romanumin effect in 1962, which is to be prayed entirely and in the Latin language.

The Sacred Triduum

33. If there is a qualified priest, acoetus fidelium(“group of faithful”), which follows the older liturgical tradition, can also celebrate the SacredTriduumin theforma extraordinaria.When there is no church or oratory designated exclusively for such celebrations, the parish priest or Ordinary, in agreement with the qualified priest, should find some arrangement favourable to the good of souls, not excluding the possibility of a repetition of the celebration of the Sacred Triduum in the same church.

The Rites of Religious Orders

34. The use of the liturgical books proper to the Religious Orders which were in effect in 1962 is permitted.

Pontificale Romanumand theRituale Romanum

35. The use of thePontificale Romanum, theRituale Romanum, as well as theCaeremoniale Episcoporumin effect in 1962, is permitted, in keeping with n. 28 of this Instruction, and always respecting n. 31 of the same Instruction.

The Holy Father Pope Benedict XVI, in an audience granted to the undersigned Cardinal President of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei on 8 April 2011, approved this present Instruction and ordered its publication.

Given at Rome, at the Offices of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei, 30 April, 2011, on the memorial of Pope Saint Pius V.

William Cardinal LEVADAPresident

Mons. Guido PozzoSecretary

[1]BENEDICTUS XVI,Litterae Apostolicae Summorum Pontificum motu proprio datae, I,AAS99 (2007) 777; cf.Institutio Generalis Missalis Romani, tertia editio 2002, n. 397.

[2]BENEDICTUS XVI,Epistola ad Episcopos ad producendas Litteras Apostolicas motu proprio datas, de Usu Liturgiae Romanae Instaurationi anni 1970 praecedentis,AAS99 (2007) 798.

[3]Cf.Code of Canon Law, Canon 838 §1 and §2.

[4]Cf.Code of Canon Law,Canon 331.

[5]Cf.Code of Canon Law,Canons 223 § 2 or 838 §1 and §4.

[6]BENEDICTUS XVI,Epistola ad Episcopos ad producendas Litteras Apostolicas motu proprio datas, de Usu Liturgiae Romanae Instaurationi anni 1970 praecedentis,AAS99 (2007) 799.

[7]Cf.Code of Canon Law,Canon 900 § 2.

[8]Cf.Code of Canon Law,Canon 249; Second Vatican Ecumenical Council, ConstitutionSacrosanctum Concilium, 36; DeclarationOptatum totius, 13.

[9]BENEDICTUS XVI,Epistola ad Episcopos ad producendas Litteras Apostolicas motu proprio datas, de Usu Liturgiae Romanae Instaurationi anni 1970 praecedentis,AAS99 (2007) 797.