Superna caelestisTranslated from the Latin
text of the Opera Omnia S. Bonaventurae, ed. by the College of St. Bonaventure,
Ad Claras Aquas, Florence, 1882: vol. I, p. XXXIX-XLIV.

Our most holy Lord Pope Sixtus IV's

Diploma

By which Bl. Bonaventure, Cardinal Bishop of Alba

Is registered in the Canon of the Saints

Pope Sixtus IVServant of the Servants of God

As a perpetual memorial

April 14, 1482 A.D.

Supernal, celestialfatherland,
the City of Jerusalem, whose own participation is in itself, so rejoices
in the salvation of all the elect, that the more outstanding are the merits
of these, the more copious does it also receive the joys of the rewards.
Which having been placed in an ecstasy of his mind the Prophet Isaias seems
to have understood, when he said (Is. 12:6)"Exult and rejoice,
dwelling of Sion, since great in your midst is the Saint."Therefore
do the choirs of all the Angels exult, who, anxious over the inhabiting
of the empty thrones, begin to conduct (souls) from virtue to virtue, to
those blessed mansions, from which the proud spirits were hurled down,
via humility. All the souls of the just also exult, who have followed the
footsteps of Christ and also all the faithful friends of God as much as
from the Old as from the New Testament, who, having contemned the vanities
of this age, rejoice together in the multitude of fellow citizens. Let
the heaven exult in praise, let the earth resound with joys, since the
generation of the Saints has brought gladness to very many. For mightily
does the piety of the faith demand, that what is conducted for the salvation
of the many, be celebrated everywhere with common joys. In truth does the
Pontiff of the union of the blessed especially rejoice, and the sacred
assembly of the Doctors, who shine in Heaven as stars for perpetual eternities,
among whom saint Bonaventure, as a new luminary, from this vally of tears
to the celestial (place), which is Jerusalem on high, with God calling
him, migrating (onward), has lept forth.

§ 1.  We however, who, with God disposing, having been carried
up to the apex of the Apostolate, exercise the care of the Christian flock,
which on account of the pleasant debt of the pastoral office, We aspire
with intense desire to form into the college of the Saints, as We ought,
to the Church Militant, for whose edification and increment, We have caused
the same Bonaventure to be registered in the catalogue of the Saints, we
can by no means speak unsuitably: Exult today and praise, dwelling of Sion,
that is the Christian religion, in which as on Mount Sion there dwells
by means of the True Faith the True God, since great in your midst is the
Saint. Certainly:"In the midst of the Church He opened his mouth,
and the Lord filled him with the spirit of wisdom and understanding and
clothed him with the stole of glory,(Eccli. 15:5), and He crowned
him at the gates of Paradise, in which with the Angels he rejoices in the
one glory and felicity.

§ 2.  Let us therefore be glad and exult, since that celestial
Curia has from us, him to whom the care for us pertains, who protects us
with his own merits, whom he instructs with his examples, illumines with
his doctrines and confrims with his miracles; whom God gave to all peoples
as a glory and honor, whose memory is held in benediction.

§ 3.  For he wrote such things concerning divine things, that
it seemed the Holy Spirit spoke in him. So piously, religiously and holily
did he live, that his life assembled in this writings, and what he wrote
he would teach by example. In which the viture of morals and the clarity
of signs have been so thoroughly proven, that, with the greatest suitable
merits and miracles, to him is due the testimony of true sanctity by the
Church Militant.

§ 4.  For when in the strong flower of youth, when human things
are not valued as things to be thrown away, he would dedicate himself to
the divine service, having entered the religion of Blessed Francis, to
which he strove through arduous deeds, he advanced so much in diligent
reading and assiduous prayer, that one could deservedly say with Wisdom:"I have desired, and understanding is given to me."(Wis.
7:7)

§ 5.  For having been illuminated by Him, who illumines every
sense, who is Light, Way, Truth and even Life, he obtained in the space
of a few years incredible knowledge (scientia), and he did not bind
up the talent entrusted to him by the Lord in a handkerchief, nor did he
bury it in the earth, but as a most wise dispensor he converted it for
the common usefulness. For in the crowded lecture halls of Paris he reigned
from a chair, where explaining in detail the hidden things of the Scriptures,
not only did he by his own voice benefit many, but he even left very many
of the best books, both in sacred letters and in the primary sciencies,
as monuments, which would be for the benefit of all time afterwards.

§ 6. Great in doctrine, not less in humility and in the merits
of life, whom Alexander of Hales, the Doctor Clarissimus, to whom he handed
himself over to be trained, experienced him to be of such innocence and
dovelike simplicity, as he was accustomed to say, that it seemed to himself,
that in him Adam had never sinned.

§ 7.  Great also in the Order of Friars Minor, by whom as
one of the very many after blessed Francis it benefited. For having been
called to its helms and created Minister General, with God inspiring them,
he showed himself to be such to his own subjects, that in him that word
of the Lord seemed to be fulfilled:"Let him that is your greater,
be your minister."(Mt 20:26; 23:11).

§ 8.  For greater in wisdom and in the integrity of morals,
he exercised the office of prelate with such charity, that willingly humble,
his hands were filled ministering to his inferiors, as a good soldier of
Christ, now with doctrine, now with admonishments, now with fraternal exhortation,
now even with bodily service. Nor did he only guard those things which
had been piously and holily instituted by Blessed Francis himself, but
he even added many other arrangements, which, with the growing number of
friars, seemed to be necessary. He also divided his own Order into provinces
and custodies.

§ 9 .  Great also was he in dignity in the Roman Church. For
growing strong in the fame of his innocence, doctrine and prudence, by
Pope Gregory X, Our predecessor of happy memory, he was called to the honor
of the Cardinalate, so that he might employ his works in the greatest and
most difficult things which were happening in those times, regarding whom
Gregory himself employed a new example on account of the vast merits of
the man. For immediately he entrusted to him the Church of Alba, which
was not accustomed to be committed to any but older cardinals.

§ 10.  This best of men and most beloved by God did not deceive
the expectation of the Supreme Pontiff and the Sacred College. But presiding
in the Council of Lyons and directing all things to the praise of God,
having allayed discords and borne away difficulties, he was of the greatest
use to and ornament of the Church Herself.

§ 11.  Which things he recognized openly, that the Lord established
him as a testament of peace and made him a prince, so that the dignity
of his priesthood would be forever, whom inane glory did not puff up, nor
riches drive to the left (i.e. among the goats on judgement day); but persevering
in faith and leniency, faithful to God, merciful to the poor, just to all,
he so put off this corruptible body, that with the Apostle he can say:"I have fought the good fight, I have run the race, I
have kept the faith, as to the rest a crown of justice has been set aside
for me."(2 Tm 4:7).

§ 12. Who even if from his perseverance alone he could have been
believed to be a Saint, according to that (saying):"Be faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life"(Apoc. 2:10),
however there followed after his death many and very great miracles, which
offer certain evidence of his sanctity and induce us to the veneration
of him, whom God manifested by his preceeding merits to be venerated. For
the Omnipotent God Himself, to manifest the power of His own virtue and
to disclose the cause of our salvation, often even honors His faithful
elect, whom he crows in Heaven, in the world, working signs and prodigies
in his memory, whereby heretical depravity is confounded, and the orthodox
faith guarded.

§ 13.  We give thanks, therefore, to God as much as We can,
because He has considered us worthy, through whom this canonization is
celebrated, which though, with the divine, extant monuments of letters
and trembling miracles, could have already long ago been (celebrated) in
due form, however never before this had it been sought with such diligence
either by princes or by others. In Our time, Our most dear sons in Christ,
Frederick the forever august Emperor of the Romans, the illustrious kings:
the most christian Louis of the Franks, Ferdinand of Sicily and Matthew
of Hungary; and also the beloved sons, the noblemen Alphonsus of Calabria,
John Mazencio of the Venetians, John Hacam (who in Italian is called Giovanni
Galeazzo Sforza) of Milan, and John Burbon, (all) distinguished dukes;
morevover the citizens of Florence, Siena, Lyons, Paris and, that which
bore such a beaming light, Bagnoregio, with such earnestness and such perseverance
requested it from Us that We would think it hard and impious to resist
them in a thing so pious, which they even seemed to request as having been
moved by God. The assiduous prayers of our venerable brother Julian, Bishop
of Savina, Protector of the Order itself were added, and also (those) of
our beloved sons Francis Samson, the Minister General, and Peter of Rudolf,
the Procurator of the said Order, a professor of Sacred Theology, who in
the name of their General Chapter requested it as something just and due.
We had read most studiously the divine writings of this Saint, by which,
after We were permitted to understand something after a lifetime, we were
always delighted. We had heard also from the more ancient friars of the
aforesaid Religion and indeed from grave men, that even those of greater
age had known that the fame of the sacredness of his life was constant;
We were accustomed to know of the many and greatest miracles, nor was there
on that account any doubt in our mind, but that he had triumphed in the
Church Triumphant in Heaven and merited veneration upon earth.

§ 14. But mindful, that We had entered in same Order of Minors
by vow, in which, with divine grace assisting, We had progressed in both
sacred letters and religious customs and had exercised the same offices
of ministry, and thence to the dignity of the Cardinalate, so that We might
recognize that through similar steps We had been elevated to the apex of
the pontificate, with the Lord disposing, through which Saint Bonaventure
himself was carried up to the unwithering glory of the Church Triumphant,
lest in this We seem more ably moved by our own affection than in due devotion,
We applied that diligence and gravity, which the magnitude of the matter
demanded. For We committed to three of Our venerable brothers, the Cardinals
of the Holy Roman Church, to order an inquiry into the truth of the miracles.
And since one of these, with the process begun, as it pleased God, had
passed from this life, We suggested another Cardinal in the place of the
defunct, for whom when he was already deceased, We substituted another.

§ 15.  Nor content with this, when the process itself had
already nearly been completed, and those who had been delegated had reported
most faithfully; We however, to whom it did not seem that in proceeding
such solemnity, as is required, was observed, ordered it to be begun anew.

§ 16.  At last, when it had been thoroughly proven from more
abundant reporting and the faith of more worthy witnesses concerning this
undertaking, that many and great miracles were worked by God through this
Saint, which in the sight of the multitude had been determined, We, lest
We seem to resist the Holy Spirit, who through the mouth of the Prophet
commands that God be praised in His Saints, in a secret consistory of Ours,
it having considered the case of this matter, had the votes of Our venerable
brothers, the Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, concerning a canonization
of this kind, examined. And since one and the same had been the opinion
of all, namely that he should be registered among the number of the Saints:

§ 17.  We thereupon held a public consitory, in which, with
a great multitude of bystanders, We publicly proclaimed a triduum of prayers
and fasting, so that God Omnipotent might deign to manifest to us what
would be the best course of action in this matter, nor suffer, that His
Church Militant to err, who strove to conform Herself to that Triumphant.

§ 18.  Thereupon with the triduum elapsed, We commanded all
who were prelates in the Roman Curia to assemble, who to a man having been
questioned, what seemed must be done, agreed upon one opinion, and determined
that Blessed Bonaventure must be canonized.

§ 19.  We therefore, following the command and will of God
and attentive, that it be just and due, that God honor in Heaven those
whom we praise with a office of veneration and glorify on earth, since
He Himself is more powerfully praised and glorified in them, who is praisable
and glorious throughout the ages, did establish this day to be celebrated
for the canonization of the same Saint Bonaventure in the midst of the
Nasilica of the Prince of Apostles in the City, in which the greatest multitude
of every kind and order streamed together. There, with all remaining things
legitimately transacted, the aforesaid Procurator of the Order of the Minors,
standing in the middle, proclaiming the saying of the blessed John the
Apostle with a clear voice, namely:"There are three, who give
witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit"(I John 5:7), proved also, with the process concerning the aforementioned
things having been held, that the very Persons of the Most Blessed Trinity
had borne witness: namely the Father in the power of his miracles, the
Son in the wisdom of his doctrine, and the Holy Spirit in the goodness
of his life. And on that account not only in the names of all, who begged
that this canonization be accomplished, but even on the part of the each
member of the Trinity, Father and Son and Holy Spirit, he requested, that
we deign to pronounce the same Blessed Bonaventure a Saint, urgently, more
urgently, and most urgently. Confident therefore, that in this canonization
God would not permit Us to err, who required that all requisite things
in this of whateverkind be observed superabundantly, and did observe such,
having been assured from the unanimous consent of Our same brothers, the
Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, and the prelates in the Roman Curia
who were present, and with the mature counsel of the omnipotent God and
the authority of His blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, We determined that
Bonaventure of Bagnoregio, of blessed memory, professor of sacred theology,
from the bosom of the sacred Order of Minors and called from the office
of the Generalate to be a Cardinal Bishop, should be a Saint and will be
inscribed, added, and entered into the catalogue of God's other Saints,
and faithfully and firmly considered (to be such); and according to these
present documents, We solemnly inscribe the same in the company of the
holy Confessors, Pontiffs and Doctors, whom the holy Church of God venerates,
and according to these present letters We do aggregate him to their number.

§ 20.  Establishing also and commanding Our venerable brothers,
the Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops and the beloved sons of the same and
also the Chapters of the patriarchal, metropolitan, and cathedral churces,
and the professors of whatever Orders, as much of Mendicants as of non-Mendicants,
not without whatever kind of ecclesiatical persons, to celebrate the feast
of this same Saint Bonaventure solemnly and devotely on the second Sunday
of the month of July, each year, and resolving that the divine office just
as for a Confessor, Pontiff, and Doctor, as much in public as in private,
as may happen, (be conducted):

§ 21.  To our truly beloved sons, the friars of the aforesaid
Order of Minors, in so far as in that manner in which the said members
of the Order are accustomed to celebrate the feasts and octaves of the
other Saints, We concede the faculty to celebrate an office of this kind
as a feast of double class and with an octave.

§ 22. In addition, We mercifully in the Lord relax and bestow with
that same authority to all who are truly penitent and have confessed, who
in the same Sunday would devoutely visit the church, in which his holy
body rests, yearly seven years and as many forty-days; to those truly,
who at other times on any Sunday, one hundred days; to those moreover,
who are present for the divine offices at churches of the Friars Minor,
wherever constituted, as much as on the very day of the feast, as during
the octave, those similar indulgences and remissions of sins, which the
Roman Pontiffs have conceded for each of the feasts of the Saints of the
same Order, from the Apostolic indults commonly promulgated, concering
the enjoined penances.

§ 23.  Considering besides, that there was undertaken by this
very Saint Bonanventure so great a measure of growth in science, holiness
of life and in the dignity of the Episcopacy and the Cardinalate of the
Holy Roman Church, and how great a familiarity and spiritual companionship
the same Saint observed in this life with blessed Thomas of Aquino, as
his contemporary, fellow student and teacher, that fraternal charity joined
together in this age them, whom We believe have attained the same rewards
in Heaven, the present Church venerates with equal honor, We concede, receiving
the aforesaid feast among the feasts of the Sacred Apostolic Palace and
ennumerating, the same indulgence in the aforesaid feast in the Church
of the Holy Apostles in the City, which is had in the feast of the Saint
Thomas of Aquino himself in the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary in the
City, commonly named (sopra) Minerva; and likewise We determine, that the
Friars Minor in the dear University of Paris with the same privileges can
and ought to enjoy and rejoice on account of the merits of the same St.
Bonaventure, with which from apostolic indults the Friar Preachers, who
in the same University are accustomed to posses and rejoice in, and do
rejoice, by the insght and grace of the same St. Thomas, or in whatsoever
manner they might be able to either posses or rejoice in the future.

§ 24.  Wherefore We require and warn each and every person
constituted in dignity, in so far as Our present letters, being solemnly
published, to exhort them by all the clergy and people of their cities,
dioceses and parishes, that God Himself, from whom all good things proceed,
be beseeched humbly, that having been entreated by the prayers and merits
of the same holy Doctor and Confessor, Bonaventure, He might guard the
Church Militant, the Apostolic Faith and all the faithful of Christ from
the incursions of the pagans and other infidels and heretics and always
protect and defend Her from all dangers; and may He grant that peace which
the world cannot give Us, with the dread of every enemy having been endured,
with firm tranquility; and that after the military service of this life
and after having layed down the ministry of the pastoral office, one with
the flock He has entrusted to Us, We may yet merit to arrive at sempiternal
joys.

§ 25.  Finally, since it might be difficult that the present,
original letters be communicated as news to everyone, We desire and determine,
that to those transcripts of these documents, marked however with the seal
of the Minister General of the aforesaid Order and duly signed by the hands
of two public notaries, there be exhibited an indoubtable faith in all
things and through all things, and in those placese wherever it be posted,
even if the original letters of this kind might be also exhibited and displayed.

To entirely no man therefore be it licit to infringe this page of Our
constitution, inscription, aggregation, statute, command, concession, relaxation,
grant, reception, ennumeration, admonition or will, or by rash daring to
contravene it. If however anyone might presume to attempt this, let him
know that he will incurr the indignation of the omnipotent God and of His
Apostles, Peter and Paul.

Given at Rome at St. Peter's, in the year of the Lord's Incarnation,
one thousand four hundred and eight-two, on the eighteenth of the Calends
of May in the eleventh year of Our pontificate.