Clara claris
  praeclara

Bulla

Alexandri episcopi

servi
  servorum Dei

Clara claris praeclara

The Bull of

Pope Alexander IV, Bishop

servant of the
  servants of God

IN
  CANONIZATIONEM S. CLARAE ASSISIENSIS

Fundatrix
  Clarissae

ON THE CANONIZATION
  OF ST. CLARE OF ASSISI

Co-Foundress of
  the Poor Clares

Textus latinus ex ed. S. Brufani,Fontes
  Franciscani, & E. Menestò, S. Brufani et al., Assisi, Edizioni
  Porziuncola, 1995, pp. 2331-2337.http://www.uan.it/alim/testi/xiii/AlimClaAssisBullaScheda.htm

Latin text taken from Ed. S.
  Brufani,Fontes Franciscani, & E. Menestò, S. Brufani et al.,
  Assisi, Edizioni Porziuncola, 1995, pp. 2331-2337.http://www.uan.it/alim/testi/xiii/AlimClaAssisBullaScheda.htm

Agnani: Sept. 26. 1255 A.D.

[Alexander
  episcopus, servus servorum Dei] Venerabilibus fratribus universis
  Archiepiscopis et Episcopis per regnum Franciae constitutis, [salutem et
  apostolicam benedictionem].

[Alexander, Bishop,
  Servant of the servants of God,] To Our venerable brothers, the Archbishops
  and Bishops established throughout the Kingdom of France, [health and
  apostolic benediction]:

CLARA CLARIS PRAECLARAmeritis,1magnae in caelo claritate gloriae, ac in
  terra splendore miraculorum sublimium clare claret. Clarae huius arcta et
  alta Religio2hic coruscat, huius sursum aeterni praemii
  radiat magnitudo, huius virtus signis magnificis, mortalibus illucescit. Huic
  Clarae intituIatum hic fuit summae Privilegium paupertatis;3huic in excelso rependitur inaestimabilis copia thesaurorum; huic a
  catholicis plena devotio et honoris cumulus exhibetur. Hanc Claram sua
  fulgida hic insignierunt opera, hanc Claram in alto divinae lucis clarificat
  plenitudo, hanc christianis populis prodigiorum eius stupenda declarant.

CLARE OUTSTANDINGLY CLEAR WITH CLEARmerits,1in Heaven with the clarity of great glory, and on
  Earth with the splendor of sublime miracles, is clearly clear. Here this
  Clare's strict and high Religion2twinkles [coruscat],
  above the greatness of this one's eternal reward radiates, this one's virtue
  by magnificent signs, begins to shine [illucescit] upon mortals. To this
  Clare there was entitled here the Privilege of most high poverty;3to this one there is repaid in the highest an inestimable abundance of
  treasures; to this one by Catholics a full devotion and a heap [cumulus] of
  honor is exhibited. This Clare did her shining [fulgida] works here mark out,
  this Clare the plenitude of Divine Light on high does clarify, this one to
  the Christian peoples do the stupendous (works) of her prodigies declare.

The
  Brilliance of St. Clare

§2. O Clara multimode titulis
  praedita claritatis! Ante conversionem tuam utique clara, in conversione clarior,
  in claustrali conversatione praeclara, et post decursum vitae praesentis
  spatium clarissima illuxisti! Ab hac Clara clarum exempli speculum huic
  saeculo prodiit; ab hac inter amoenitates caelestes suave lilium virginitatis
  offertur; ab hac in terris manifesta subventionum remedia sentiuntur. O
  admiranda Clarae beatae claritas, quae tanto studiosius per singula
  quaeritur, tanto splendidior in singulis invenitur! Emicuit haec, inquam, in
  saeculo, in Religione praefulsit; in domo illuxit ut radius, in claustro
  coruscavit ut fulgor. Emicuit in vita, post mortem irradiat; claruit in
  terra, in caelo relucet! O quanta huius vehementia luminis et quam vehemens
  istius illuminatio claritatis! Manebat quidem haec lux secretis inclusa
  claustralibus, et foras

§2. O Clare, endowed in a manifold manner with
  titles of clarity! Before thy conversion (thou were) indeed clear, in thy
  conversion clearer, in thy comportment in the cloister [in claustrali
  conversatione] outstandingly clear, and after having run down the space of
  thy present life thou has begun to shine as most clear! By this Clare a clear
  mirror of example goes forth to this generation [saeculo]; by this one the
  lily of virginity is offered among the heavenly amenities; by this one
  throughout the lands [in terris] are the manifest remedies of interventions
  [subventionum] sensed. O clarity of blessed Clare to be admired, which as
  much as it is sought more studiously through individual examples [per
  singula], so much more splendid is it found among individual examples [in
  singulis]! This one gleamed [emicuit], I say, in the world [saeculo], in
  Religion she outshone [praefulsit]; in her house she enlightened [illuxit] as
  a ray, in the cloister she flashed [pcoruscavit] as lightning. She gleamed in
  life, after death she irradiates; she was clear on Earth, in the sky she
  shines back [relucet]! O how great the vehemence of the light [lumen] of this
  one and how vehement the illumination of this clarity of hers! This light
  [lux], indeed, remained enclosed in secret cloisters, and outside

1Hicpraeclaraindicatclara prae
  ceteris. Praeclaritas est signaculum civitatis Hierosolymae caelestis:
  cf. Ps. 47,2.2Religio, id est,institutum religionis.
  Erat verbum communis in saeculum tertium decimum; cf. Opuscula S. Francisci.3Privilegium summae poveratis erat permissio ottenta ex
  Pontifice Romano pro sororibus S. Damiani ad vivendum sine propria
  communitaria.

1Here the Latinpraeclarasignifiesclear
  before all others, or in other wordsoutstandingly clear, which
  translation will be followed throughout. Being outstandingly clear
  [praeclaritas] is a mark of the heavenly Jerusalem: cf. Ps. 47:2.2Religion, that isreligious institute. This
  was the common term for a religious order in the 13th Century; cf. Writings
  of St. Francis.3The Privilege of most high poverty was the permission
  obtained from the Roman Pontiff for the sisters of S. Damiano to live without
  community property.

p. 2332

micantes radios emittebat; colligebatur
  in arcto coenobio, et in amplo saeculo spargebatur; servabatur intra, et
  extra manabat. Latebat namque Clara, sed eius vita patebat; silebat Clara,
  sed sua fama clamabat; celabatur in cella, et in urbibus noscebatur. Nec
  mirum; quialucernatamaccensa, tamlucens,abscondi
  non poteratquin splenderet et clarumin domoDomini daret lumen;1nec recondi poterat vas tot aromatum quin fragraret et suavi odore dominicam
  respergeret mansionem. Imo, cum in angusto solitudinis reclusorioalabastrumsui corporis haec dure contereret, tota omnino Ecclesiae aula sanctitatis
  eiusodoribus replebatur.2

it emitted sparkling [micantes] rays; it was
  gathered together in a strict convent [arcto coenobio], and it was sprinkled
  upon the entire age [in amplo saeculo]; it was guarded within, and it flowed
  forth outside. For indeed, Clare lay hidden, but her life lay open; Clare was
  silent, but her fame shouted out; she was concealed in her cell and she was
  known among cities. Nor (is it) wonderful; because alight[lucerna]
  so enkindled, solightsome[lucens],could not be hidden awayso as to not shine [spenderet] and give a clear lightin the houseof
  the Lord;1nor could a vessel of so many aromatics be put
  back and not fragrance and resprinkle the Lord's mansion with a sweet odor.
  Nay, since in the narrow recluse of solitude this one harshly ground down the
  alabaster of her body, the whole court [aula] of the Churchhas been
  filled fullin every mannerwith the odorsof her sanctity.2

How St. Clare
  forsook the world

§3. Sane cum ipsa, dum adhuc
  puella esset in saeculo, hunc mundum fragilem et immundum mundo calle ab
  aetate tenera transilire studeret, et pretiosum suae virginitatis thesaurum
  illibato semper pudore custodiens, claritatis et pietatis operibus vigilanter
  intenderet, ita quod ex ea grata et laudabilis ad vicinos et alios fama
  prodiret, b. Franciscus, audito huius famae praeconio, coepit confestim
  hortari eam, et ad Christi perfectam inducere servitutem. Quae sacris illius
  monitis mox adhaerens, et mundum cum terrenis omnibus penitus abdicare, ac
  soli Domino in paupertate voluntaria famulari desiderans, hoc suum fervens
  desiderium, quam cito potuit, adimplevit: quia tandem cuncta sua bona, ut una
  secum quidquid etiamhabebatChristi obsequio deputaret, ineleemosynasetpauperumsubsidia distribuit et convertit.3Cumque de saeculi strepitu fugiens, ad quamdam campestrem declinasset
  ecclesiam,4et ab ipso b. Francisco, sacra ibi recepta
  tonsura, processisset ad aliam, consanguineis eius ipsam exinde reducere
  molientibus, illa protinus amplectens altare, pannosque apprehendens ipsius,
  crinium sui capitis incisura detecta, eisdem consanguineis in hoc fortiter
  restitit et constanter; quia cum iam esset mente integra iuncta Deo, pati non
  poterat ab eius servitio se divelli. Denique cum ad ecclesiam S. Damiani
  extra civitatem Assisinatem, unde traxit originem, per eundem b. Franciscum
  adducta foisset, ibi ei Dominus ad amorem et cultum assiduum sui nominis
  plures socias aggregavit.

§3. In a healthy manner, when she, while she
  was still a girl in the world, studied to leap over this fragile and unclean
  world from a tender age by means of a clean, narrow path [calle], and
  guarding the precious treasure of her virginity by a sense of shame, always unspotted,
  vigilantly stretched unto works of clarity and piety, so much that there came
  forth from her a pleasing and praiseworthy report [fama] to her neighbors and
  others, blessed Francis, having heard the public commendation [praeconio] of
  her fame, undertook with complete haste [confestim] to exhort her, and to
  induce her to the perfect service of Christ. Who, thereupon adhering to his
  sacred warnings, and desiring to abdicate thoroughly [penitus] the world with
  all earthly things, and to serve as a family member [famulari] the Lord alone
  in voluntary poverty, she fulfilled this her fervent desire, as soon as she
  could: because at last she distributed and converted all her goods, as she
  counted out of reverence to Christ whatever else she had as one thing with
  herself, intoalmsand subsidiesfor the poor.3And when fleeing the clatter of the world [de saeculi strepitu], she went
  down to a certain country [campestrem] church,4and by
  blessed Francis himself, there received the sacred tonsure, she processed to
  another church), with her relatives growing soft [molientibus] to lead her
  back (home) from that place, she, immediately embracing the altar, and
  grasping her clothes, having uncovered the sheering [incisura] of the hair of
  her head, strongly and steadily resisted the same relatives in this. Then
  when she had been brought by the same blessed Francis to the church of San
  Damiano, outside the city of Assisi, where she was born [unde traxit
  originem], there the Lord for the love and assiduous cult of His Name
  gathered to her very many associates.

St. Clare
  founds the Order of St. Damiano

§4. Ab hac siquidem insignis et
  sacer Ordo S. Damiani,

§4. From this, indeed, distinguished and sacred
  Order of San Damiano,

1Hic editores citat Mat. 5,14.15.2Hic editores citat Mat. 26,7; Joan. 13,3.3Hic editores citat Luc. 12,33; 18,22.4Scilicet, S. Maria Angelorum in Portiuncula, quae in illo
  tempore intra campis infra civitatem Assisiensem fuit.

1Here the editors cite Mt. 5:14-15.2Here the latin editors cite Mt. 26:7, Jn. 13:3.3Here the latin editors cite Lk. 12:33; 18:22.4St. Mary of the Angeles of the Portiuncula, which at that
  time lay among the fields below the city-state of Assisi.

p. 2333

per orbem iam longe diffusus,
  salutare sumpsit exordium. Haec, adhortante ipso b. Francisco, huic novae
  sanctaeque observantiae sequendum dedit initium; haec huius magnae Religionis
  fuit primarium et stabile fundamentum; haec huius alti operis lapis extitit1primitivus. Haec genere nobilis, sed conversatione nobilior, virginitatem,
  quam prius etiam custodiverat, sub hac sanctimoniae regula praecipue
  conservavit. Hanc postmodum Religionem mater eius, Hortulana nomine, piis
  intenta operibus, ipsius natae sequendo vestigia, devote suscepit; in qua
  demum haec optima hortulana, quae in horto dominico protulit talem plantam,
  conclusit feliciter dies suos.

spread far throughout the whole globe, one
  takes up a salutary exordium. She, by the exhorting of blessed Francis
  himself, gave a start, that must be followed, [sequendum initium] to this new
  and holy observance; she of this great Religion was the primary and stable
  foundation; she of this high work stood forth1as its
  primitive stone. She of a noble family, but of a more noble comportment,
  conserved in an outstanding manner [praecipue] the virginity, which she had
  also previously guarded, under this rule of sanctimony. After a while her
  mother, Hortulana by name, intent on pious works, by following the footsteps
  of her own newborn [ipsius natae], devoutly undertook this Religion; in which
  at last this optimum little garden [hortulana], which brought forth such a
  plant in the Lord's garden, happily concluded her days.

The
  Brilliance of St. Clare as Foundress

§5. Post aliquot vero annos, ipsa
  b. Clara monasterii et Sororum regimen, nimia eiusdem S. Francisci devicta
  importunitate, recepit. Haee utique fuitarbor procera2et eminens, longis distenta ramis, quae in agro Ecclesiaedulcem fructumreligionis attulit, et ad cuius delectabilemumbram, sub3illius amoenitate fructum huiusmodi libaturae concurrerunt undique multae
  alumnae fidei et concurrunt. Haec fuit vena munda Vallis Spoletanae, quae
  novamaquaevitalisfontem4ad refectionem
  animarum et commodum propinavit; qui iam per diversos rivulos in territorium
  Ecclesiae derivatus, plantaria religionis infudit. Haec fuit altum
  sanctitatiscandelabrumvehementer intabernaculo5Domini rutilans, ad cuius ingentem splendorem plurimae properaverunt et
  properant,suasde illius luminelampades6accendentes. Haec profecto in agro fidei plantavit et coluit vineam
  paupertatis, de qua fructus salutis pingues et divites colliguntur; haec in
  praedio Ecclesiae humilitatis hortum constituit, multiplici rerum consertum
  inopia, in quo magna virtutum copia reperitur; haec in Religionis districtu
  arcem arctae7abstinentiae fabricavit, in qua larga
  spiritualis alimoniae refectio ministratur.

§5. But after a few years, blessed Clare
  herself, having been overcome by the exceeding importunity of the same St.
  Francis, received the government of the monastery and the Sisters. She,
  indeed, was thetalland eminenttree,2which, having spread out with long branches, brought into the field of the
  Churchthe sweet fruitof a Religion, and to whose delightfulshade,
  under3its amenity there would run together from all
  sides many nurslings of the faith, (who) were to offer fruit of this kind,
  and do they run! She was the clean vein of the Valley of Spoleto, which gave a newfountof livingwater4as drink for
  the refection and convenience of souls; which, diverted now through diverse
  rivulets in the territory of the Church, infuses the young trees [plantaria]
  of Religion. She was the tallcandelabraof sanctity vehemently shining
  red [rutilans] inthe tabernacleof the Lord,5to
  whose vast [ingentem] splendor very many women hastened and do hasten,
  enkindlingtheir own lampsfrom that light [lumine].6She as a result [profecto] planted and cultivated in the field of the Faith
  the vine of poverty, from which the fatty and rich fruits of salvation are
  gathered; she established in the praesidium of the Church a garden of
  humility, in which, having twined together those poor in a manifold of
  things, there is found a great abundance of virtues; She in the occupation
  [districtu] of Religion constructed [fabricavit] a citadel of strict7abstinence, in which there is ministered a broad refection of spiritual
  nourishment.

The
  Brilliance of St. Clare's Virtues

§6. Haec fuit pauperum
  primiceria, ducissa humilium, magistra continentium, et poenitentium
  Abbatissa. Haec suum monasterium, creditamque in illo sibi familiam, solicite
  ac prudenter in timore et servitio Domini et plena Ordinis observantia
  gubernavit: vigil

§6. She was the princess [primiceris] of the
  poor, the duchess [ducissa] of the humble, the teacher of the continent, and
  the Abbess of the penitent. She governed her monastery, and the family
  entrusted to her in it, solicitly and prudently in the fear and service of the
  Lord and in the full observance of the Order: vigil

1I. e.exstitit.2Hic edd. citat Dan. 4,8.3Hic edd. citat Cant. 2, 3.4Hic edd. citat Est. 10,6.5Hic edd. citat Heb. 9,2.6Hic edd. citat Mat. 25,7.7Hic textus legitartaeproarctae.

1There the text readsextitit[stood out],
  that isexstitit[stood out].2Here the editors cite Dan. 4:8.3Here the editors cite Cant. 2:3.4Here the editors cite Ester 10:6.5Here the editors cite Hebr. 9:2.6Here the editors cite Mt. 25:7.7Here the text readsstrict[artae] instead ofstrict[arctae].

p. 2334

in cura, in ministerio studiosa,
  in exhortatione attenta; diligens in admonitione, in correctione moderata, temperata
  in praeceptis; in compassione praestabilis, discreta in silentio, in sermone
  matura, et consulta in cunctis ad perfectum regimen opportunis, volens magis
  famulari quam dominari, et honorare quam honore sustolli. Huius vita erat
  aliis eruditio et doctrina.Inhoclibro vitae1ceterae vivendi regulam didicerunt; in hoc vitae speculo reliquae vitae
  semitas inspexere. Corpore namque sistebat in terra, sed animo versabatur in
  caelo; humilitatis vasculum, armarium castitatis, charitatis ardor, dulcor benignitatis,
  patientiae robur, nexus pacis et familiaritatis communio: mitis in verbo,
  lenis in facto, et in omnibus amabilis et accepta. Et ut, carne depressa,
  convalesceret spiritu (quia quisque hoste suo debilitato fit fortior), nudum
  solum et interdum sarmenta pro lecto habebat, et pro pulvinari sub capite
  durum lignum, unaque tunica cum mantello de vili, despecto et hispido panno
  contenta. His humilibus indumentis ad operimentum sui corporis utebatur,
  aspero cilicio de cordulis crinium equorum contexto nonnunquam adhibito iuxta
  carnem. Arcta quoque in cibo et in potu districta, tanta se in his froenabat
  abstinentia, quod longo tempore tribus diebus in hebdomada, videlicet
  secunda, quarta et sexta feria, nihil penitus pro sui corporis alimento
  gustavit, reliquis nihilominus diebus adeo se cibariorum paucitate
  restringens, quod aliae de ipsa, quomodo sub tam forti districtione
  subsistere poterat, mirabantur. Vigiliis insuper et orationibus assidue
  dedita, in his praecipue diurna et nocturna tempora expendebat. Diuturnis
  tandem perplexa languoribus, cum ad exercitium corporale non posset surgere
  per se ipsam, Sororum suarum suffragio levabatur et, ad tergum eius
  fulcimentis appositis, propriismanibus laborabat,2ne in suis etiam esset infirmitatibus otiosa. Unde de panno lineo huius sui
  studii et laboris plura pro altaris sacrificio corporalia fieri fecit, et per
  plana et montana Assisii diversis ecclesiis exhiberi.

in care, in ministry studious, in exhortation
  attentive; diligent in admonition, in correction moderate, temperate in
  precepts; in compassion outstanding, discrete in silence, in speech mature,
  and well considered in all the things opportune to a perfect government,
  willing more to serve as a family member [famulari] than to rule as a lord
  [dominari], and to honor than to be taken up in honor. Her life was an
  education [eruditio] and a doctrine to others.Inthisbook of life1all the other (sisters) learned the rule for living; in this mirror of life
  the rest (of women learn) to inspect the paths to life. For indeed she caused
  herself in body to stand on Earth, but in spirit she was turned unto the sky;
  a little vessel of humility, an armoire [armarium] of chastity, an ardor of
  charity, a sweetness of benignity, an oak-strength of patience, a knot of
  peace and a communion of familiarity: meek in work, supple in deed, and in
  all things lovable and accepted. And, with the flesh depressed, to convalesce
  in spirit — because anyone, with their enemy debilitated, is made the
  stronger — she kept [habebat] the floor bare and brushwood for a bed, and for
  a pillow under her head hard wood, and content with one tunic with a mantle
  of vile, despised and rough cloth. These humble garments did she use for the
  covering of her body, a sharp cilice woven from little cords of horse hair
  [de cordulis crinium equorum] sometimes employed next to the flesh. Strict
  too in food and in drink severe [districta], she curbed herself with so great
  an abstinence in these, that for a long time for three days a week, namely,
  Monday, Wednesday and Friday, she tasted nearly nothing for her body,
  nevertheless on the rest of the days restricting herself to such an extent
  with a paucity of foods, that the other (sisters) use to wonder about her, in
  what manner she could subsist under so strong a withdrawal [districtione].
  Over and above these, dedicated assiduously to vigils and prayers, she
  expended day and night-time chiefly in these. At last perplexed with daily
  languors, when she could not rise by herself to corporal exertion [exercitium],
  she was raised by the suffrage of her Sisters and, having placed supports at
  her back, sheworked withherown hands,2,
  lest even in her infirmities she be idle [otiosa]. Whence from linen cloth of
  this her own study and labor, she caused very many corporals for the
  Sacrifice of the Altar to be made, and to be employed throughout the plains
  and mountains of Assisi in diverse churches.

St. Clare's
  love of holy Poverty

§7. Amatrix vero praecipua et
  colona sedula paupertatis; sic illam suo affixit animo, sic eam in suis
  desideriis alligavit, quod semper in ipsius dilectione firmior et ardentior
  in amplexu, a districta et delectabili

§7. But a chief lover and sedulous column of poverty;
  thus did she affix it in her soul, thus did she bind herself to it in her
  desires, that always more firmer in its love [dilectione] and more ardent in
  its embrace, from its severe and delightful

1Hic edd. citat Apoc 21,27.2Hic edd. cfr. 1 Cor 4,12.

1Here the editors cite Apoc. 21:27.2Here the editors refer to 1 Cor 4:12.

p. 2335

eius copula pro nulla unquam
  necessitate discessit. Nec aliquibus prorsus potuit induci suasibus ad consentiendum,
  quod suum monasterium proprias possessiones haberet quamquam fel. rec.
  Gregorius papa, praedecessor noster, de multa indulgentia ipsius monasterii
  pie cogitans, libenter illi voluerit, pro Sororum eius sustentatione,
  possessiones sufficientes et congruas deputare.

bond she never stepped back for any necessity.
  Nor could she in a straightforward manner [prorsus] be induced by any
  persuasions to consent, that her monastery have its own possessions, even
  though Pope Gregory, our predecessor of happy memory, from much indulgence
  thinking piously of this very monastery, had freely willed to depute to it,
  for the sustenance of her Sisters, possessions sufficient and congruous.

The Miracles
  of St. Clare

§8. Verum quia magnum et splendidum
  luminare supprimi non potest, quin suae radios praeferat claritatis, in
  ipsius etiam vita multis et variis miraculis virtus suae sanctitatis
  effulsit. Nam cuidam de Sororibus ipsius monasterii vocem, quam a longo
  tempore quasi omnino perdiderat, restauravit. Alii, officio linguae penitus
  destitutae, loquelam restituit expeditam. Alteri aurem surdam aperuit ad
  auditum. Laborantem febre, tumentem hydropisi, plagatam fistula et aliis
  oppressas languoribus, liberavit, facto Crucis signaculo super eas.1Quendam Fratrem de Ordine Minorum sanavit ab insaniae passione. Cum autem
  quadam vice oleum in monasterio totaliter defecisset, ipsa, vocato Fratre qui
  erat eidem monasterio pro colligendis eleemosynis deputatus, accepit urceum
  atque lavit, vacuumque iuxta fores ipsius monasterii posuit, ut illum idem
  Frater pro oleo acquirendo deferret; quem cum vellet ipse apprehendere,
  invenit eum oleo, beneficio divinae largitatis, impletum. Rursum cum uno die
  nonnisi unius panis medietas pro refectione Sororum in eodem monasterio
  haberetur, ipsa medietatem eandem iussit in frusta dividi et Sororibus
  dispensari; quam inter manus frangentis, Illequi vivusestpanisetdat escam esurientibus,2multiplicavit in tantum,
  quod quinquaginta sufficientes factae fuerunt exinde portiones, et Sororibusdiscumbentibus
  distributae.3Per haec et alia signa conspicua, suorum,
  dum adhuc viveret, innotuit praeeminentia meritorum. Nam et cum in extremis
  ageret, candidus beatarum virginum coetus, micantibus coronis ornatus, in quo
  una ex ipsis eminentior et fulgidior apparebat, visus est domum intrare, ubi
  eadem Christi famula decumbebat, et usque ad lectulum eius procedere, ac
  circa eam quasi visitationis officium et confortationis solamen, quodam
  humanitatis studio, exhibere.

§8. Truly, because a great and splendid window
  cannot be concealed [luminare supprimi], and not bring forth the rays of its
  clarity, even in her life did the virtue of her sanctity shine out in many
  and various miracles. For to a certain one of the Sisters of her monastery,
  she restored the voice, which she had for a long time almost entirely lost.
  To another, thoroughly destitute of the use [officio] of the tongue, she
  restored unencumbered [expeditam] speech. To another she opened a deaf ear to
  hearing. Having made the sign of the Cross upon them,1she
  liberated one laboring under fever, one swelling with hydropsy, one plagued
  with a fistula and others oppressed by languors. A certain friar of the Order
  of Minors she healed from the suffering of insanity. Moreover when at a
  certain time [quadam vice] the olive oil in the monastery totally failed, she
  herself, having called the Friar who has been deputed to the same monastery
  for the gathering of alms, accepted a jug [urceum] and washed it, and placed
  it empty next to the doors [fores] of the monastery, so that the same Friar
  might bear it off for acquiring olive oil; who when he wanted to take it,
  found it filled with oil, by the benefice of a divine largess. Again, when
  one day not but one half of a loaf of bread was had in the monastery for the
  refection of the Sisters, she herself ordered the same half-loaf to be
  divided in vain and dispensed to the Sisters; which among the hands of the
  one breaking it, Hewho is the Living Breadand whogives food to
  those who are hungry,2multiplied it unto so much, that
  there was made from it portions sufficient for fifty, and it wasdistributedfor the Sistersreclining at table[discumbentibus].3Through these and other conspicuous signs, He marked out, while she still
  lived, the pre-eminence of her merits. For even when she was in her last
  moments [in extremis ageret], the brilliant white company of blessed Virgins,
  ornamented with sparkling crowns, among whom one of them appeared more
  eminently and more shiningly, was seen to enter the house, where the same
  family of Christ use to recline at table, and even unto her small bed
  [lectulum] to proceed, and as if to exhibit about her the office of visiting
  and the solace of comforting, with a certain zeal for human kindness [humanitatis
  studio].

1Scilicet, Sorores eius.2Hic edd. citat Ioa. 6,41; Ps. 145,7.3Hic edd. citat Luc 9,14-16.

1That is, her Sisters.2Here the editors cite Jn. 6:41 ;Ps. 145:7.3Here the editors cite Lk. 9:14-16.

p. 2336

Post obitum vero eius, quidam,
  qui morbo caduco ruebat et propter crus contractum gradi non poterat, ad
  sepulcrum delatus ipsius fuit: ibi, crure ipso quasi fragoris sonitu
  faciente, ab utraque infirmitate curatus. Curvi renibus, membris contracti,
  praecipites furia et dementi furore ferales, receperunt ibidem integram
  sospitatem. Cuidam sua dextra manus, cuius ipse usum ex illata sibi vehementi
  percussione ita perdiderat, quod nihil omnino per eam, velut prorsus
  inutilem, poterat operari, fuit ad actum suum pristinum, ipsius Sanctae
  meritis, plenarie reformata. Alius qui diutina caecitate lumen amiserat
  oculorum, cum ad idem sepulcrum sub ducatu alterius accessisset, recuperato
  inibi visu, rediit exinde sine duce. His et quamplurimis aliis operibus et
  miraculis haec venerabilis Virgo resplenduit gloriosis, ut evidenter appareat
  adimpletum illud quod de ipsa mater eius, dum esset ex ea gravida et oraret,
  dicitur audivisse: videlicet quod paritura erat quoddam lumen, quod orbem
  plurimum illustraret.

But after her passing, a certain man, who
  having fallen sick grew worse [morbo caduco ruebat] and on account of a
  contracted shin bone could not walk, was brought to her sepulchre: there,
  with the shin bone itself making a sound as if of breaking, he was cured of each
  infirmity. Those bent-over at the kidneys, contracted in members, quick to
  fall headlong into a rage and wild men, demented by fury, received in that
  place a complete cure [integram sospitatem]. A certain man's own right hand —
  the very use of which he had thus lost out of a vehement percussion brought
  upon him — because he could do entirely nothing by means of it, just as if it
  were, in a word, useless, was reformed in a full manner to its pristine
  acting, by the merits of the Saint herself. Another, who by a long-termed
  [diutina] blindness has lost the light of his eyes, when he had approached
  the same sepulchre under the guiding [ducatu] of another, having recovered
  his sight in that place, returned from that place without a guide [duce]. In
  these and how very many other works and glorious miracles is this venerable
  Virgin resplendent, so that there evidently appears fulfilled that which her
  very own mother, while she was pregnant with her and was praying, is said to
  have heard: that she was going to bear a certain light [lumen], which would
  light up the globe in very many ways [orbem plurimum illustraret].

The Act of
  Canonization

§9. Gaudeat itaque mater
  Ecclesia, quod talem genuit et educavit filiam, quae tamquam virtutum foecunda
  parens, multas religionis alumnas suis produxit exemplis, et ad perfectum
  Christi servitium pleno magisterio informavit. Laetetur et devota turba
  fidelium, quod Rex eaelorum et Dominus, sororem ipsorum et sociam, quam in
  sponsam sibi elegerat, ad suum praecelsum et praeclarum palatium cum gloriaintroduxit.1Nam et Sanctorum congaudent agmina, quod in superna eorum patria novellae
  regalis sponsae nuptiae celebrantur. Ceterum, quia congruit ut, quam Dominus
  exaltavit in caelo, Catholica Ecclesia veneretur in terra quia de sanctitate
  vitae ac miraculis eius, diligenti et attenta inquisitione ac examinatione
  distincta et solemni discussione praemissis, liquido constitit: licet alias
  etiam et in propinquis et in remotis partibus satis essent prae; cognita
  lucide eius acta: Nos de communi fratrum nostrorum et praelatorum omnium,
  tunc apud Sedem apostolicam existentium consilio et assensu, de omnipotentia
  divina confisi, auctoritate beatorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum ac nostra
  ipsam cathalogo sanctarum Virginum duximus adscribendam.

§9. And so, let Mother Church rejoice, that She
  has born and educated such a daughter, who as a parent fecund with virtues,
  has produced many nurselings of (this) Religion as Her own examples, and has
  informed them to the perfect service of Christ by Her full magisterium. Let
  the devout crowd of the faithful also be glad, that the King of Heaven and
  (their) Lord,has introducedtheir sister and companion, whom He had
  chosen as His own spouse, to His palace, outstandingly excelling [praecelsus]
  and outstandingly clear with glory.1For the marching
  armies [agmina] of the Saints rejoice also together, that in their supernal
  fatherland the nuptials of a new royal spouse are celebrated. All the rest,
  because it is fitting as, she whom the Lord has exalted in the sky, the
  Catholic Church venerate on Earth, that from the sanctity and miracles of her
  life, having been reviewed [praemisssis] by a diligent and attentive
  inquisition and a distinct examination and a solemn discussion, She plainly
  establish: even though otherwise, both in near and in remote parts, they
  would also be sufficient beforehand; her acts having been lucidly known: We
  from the common counsel and assent of our brother (Cardinals) and of all
  prelates, at that time present at the Apostolic See, having drawn confidence
  [confisi] from the Divine Omnipotence, by the authority of the blessed
  Apostles, Peter and Paul, and Our own, we direct that the same is to
  inscribed in the catalogue of holy Virgins.

1Hic edd. citat Cant. 1,3; Mat. 22,2.

1Here the editors cite Cant. 1,3; Mat. 22,2.

p. 2337

The Feast of
  St. Clare

§10. Ideoque universitatem
  vestram monemus et hortamur attente per apostolica vobis scripta mandantes, quatenus
  II idus augusti festum eiusdem Virginis devote ac solemniter celebretis et
  faciatis a vestris subditis venerabiliter celebrari, ut ipsam habere
  mereamini apud Deum piam et sedulam adiutricem. Et ut ad venerandum eius
  sepulcrum avidius et copiosius christiani populi confluat multitudo, ac
  celebrius ipsius festivitas percolatur, omnibus [vere poenitentibus et
  confessis], qui ad illud cum reverentia in eiusdem Virginis festo, vel etiam
  infra ipsius festi octavas, annuatim accesserint, ipsius suffragia humiliter
  de omnipotentis [Dei misericordia et beatorum Petri et Pauli apostolorum eius
  auctoritate] confisi, unum annum et quadraginta dies [de iniunctis sibi
  poenitentiis] relaxamus.

§10. And for that reason we warn and exhort all
  of you attentively through apostolic mandates written by Us, to this extent
  that on the second day before the Ides of August you celebrate devoutly and
  solemnly the feast of the same Virgin and cause it to be celebrated by your
  subjects in a venerable manner, so that you may merit to have her before God
  as your pious and sedulous adjutrix. And so that the multitude of the
  Christian people might flow to venerate her sepulchre in a more avid and
  copious manner, her festivity be also thoroughly honored with greater crowds
  [celebrius percolatur], to all [truly penitent and confessed], who come to it
  with reverence on the feast of the same Virgin, and/or who might even
  approach yearly during the octave days of her feast, having confided humbly
  in her suffrages, We do, by the mercy of the Omnipotent God and by the
  authority of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, loosen them one year and
  forty days [from the penances enjoined upon them].

[Datum Anagniae, sexto kalendas
  octobris, pontificatus nostri anno primo].

[Given at Anagni, the sixth day before the
  Calends of October, in the first year of our pontificate.]

In textu latino divisiones propter convenientiam
  lectoris ab interprete additae sunt. Ea intra [ ] continunt verba, non inventa
  in textu orginali, sed inferenda ex more ab editoribus textus latini. Nota
  inferiora sunt addita ab interprete.

The English translation here has been released to the
  public domain by its author. The paragraph divisions and titles have been
  added by the translator for the convenience of the reader. Items in square [
  ] brackets are either translations of those in the same in the Latin text, or
  the Latin words corresponding to the English words. Items in round ( )
  brackets are terms implicit in the Latin syntax or which are required for
  clarity in English, added by the English translator. Footnotes have been
  added by the English translator.