ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IITO THE BUSINESS LEADERS AND BOARD MEMBERSOF THE CHASE MANHATTAN BANK OF NEW YORK

Monday, 19 June 1989

Ladies and Gentlemen,

I am pleased to welcome you here on the occasion of your visit to Rome. My cordial greeting goes to all of you and to your spouses.

Your position as business leaders and board members of a prestigious international bank enables you to understand and to influence the complex, interdependent economic life of today’s world. While there are positive signs of economic growth and prosperity for many people, there is an even greater number of men, women and children all over the world whose material well-being and development are seriously hampered by economic problems. I am thinking in particular of the international debt question, which remains a serious threat to the peace and progress of the human family. The Holy See has sought to make a positive contribution to the solution of this problem by calling attention to its ethical dimensions. It has urged greater human solidarity and mutual respect based on our common humanity and the common good of all mankind.

No doubt there will be those who believe that today’s economic, political and social problems are so vast and impersonal as to be beyond effective control. But it is my conviction that the attitudes and decisions of leaders like yourselves do make a profound difference for good or ill in shaping the future of humanity. I am confident that you who have been so richly blessed in your country share my concern for the plight of those who are poor, and that you will not fail to be compassionate as well as responsible stewards of the material goods entrusted to you.

I wish to assure you today of my prayers for you and your loved ones, especially your children and those who might be sick or troubled. May Almighty God guide you in your work and bless you with his gifts of joy and peace.

© Copyright 1989 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See