JOHN PAUL IIANGELUSCastel GandolfoSunday, 18 July 2004

JOHN PAUL II

ANGELUS

Castel GandolfoSunday, 18 July 2004

1. I returned yesterday from my short stay in the Valle d'Aosta and our gathering for the Angelus today gives me the opportunity to greet all of you who have come here straight away.

On this Sunday, the liturgy once again proposes for our meditation the Gospel episode of Jesus' visit to the house ofMartha and Mary(cf. Lk 10: 38-42). While Martha is totally taken up with household tasks, Mary is seated at the Master's feet listening to his word. Christ affirms that Mary "has chosen the good portion, which shall not be taken away from her" (Lk 10: 42).Listening to the Word of Godis the most important thing in our lives.

2. Christ is always in our midst and desires to speak to our hearts. We can listen to him by meditating with faith on Sacred Scripture, by recollection in private and communal prayer, by silent meditation before the Tabernacle, from which he speaks to us of his love.

Christians, especially onSundays, are called to meet and listen to the Lord. This happens most completely through participation in Holy Mass, during which Christ prepares the banquet of the Word and of the Bread of Life for the faithful. But other moments of prayer and reflection, of rest and brotherhood, can also be profitably combined to make theLord's Dayholy.

3. When, through the action of the Holy Spirit, God takes up his dwelling in the heart of the believer, it becomes easier for him/her to serve the brethren. This is what happened in a unique and perfect way in Mary Most Holy. To her we entrust this vacation period, to make the most of it as a favourable time to rediscover the primacy of the interior life.

After leading the Angelus the Holy Father greeted the groups present in various languages.

I am pleased to be with you again, dear citizens of Castel Gandolfo, and I thank you for your welcome, as warm as always. I cordially greet Cardinal Angelo Sodano, Secretary of State, titular Bishop of the Diocese of Albano, Bishop Agostino Vallini and Bishop Paolo Gillet, the Parish Priest and his collaborators. I greet the Mayor and the other municipal Authorities, the Director and the Personnel of the Pontifical Villas and all of you, dear people of Castel Gandolfo.

I greet the French-speaking visitors who are with us for the prayer of the Angelus, especially the young people. May you take Mary as the model for your Christian life!

I greet the English-speaking visitors who have prayed the Angelus with us today: may these summer months bring you the Lord's blessings of grace and peace.

I cordially greet the Spanish-speaking pilgrims who have come to Castel Gandolfo for the prayer of theAngelus.May the Virgin Mary accompany you in this vacation period! Have a happy Sunday!

I greet the Polish pilgrims: from Bujaków, from the Diocese of Zielona Góra-Gorzów, the "Oasis of New Life" group in third grade, and all who are gathered with us via radio and television. God bless you all, best wishes and happy vacation!

Lastly I greet with affection the Italian-speaking pilgrims, and wish them all a good Sunday.

© Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See