ADDRESS OF PAUL VITO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF CHINATO THE HOLY SEE*

Tuesday, 22 April 1969

Mister Ambassador,

It is with cordial appreciation that We receive the Credential Letters with which you come to Us as Ambassador of the Republic of China.

We thank Your Excellency for your kind words in recalling the warm and friendly relationship, founded on mutual esteem, and on respect for the higher values of moral and spiritual integrity, which has for centuries prevailed between this Apostolic See and the beloved Chinese people. Confident that your mission will help greatly in strengthening and enriching such relations, We gladly assure Your Excellency of Our constant desire to provide every possible assistance and favour to your efforts.

The Republic you so nobly represent has given an admirable example of enlightened progress, the results of which are evident in the most varied fields, while at the same time sustaining, defending, and ever increasing the ancient treasure of Chinese civilization and culture. We cannot but mention the beautiful unity of family life, respect for parents and elders, and the high consideration in which education, learning, wisdom and freedom are held. To the preservation of these values, so greatly esteemed also by the Church, Chinese Catholics will ever give their support and their generous contribution. Indeed, the Catholic Church is, and intends to remain, the defender not only of religious principles, but also of all those moral, spiritual and cultural values which are the common heritage of all mankind, and which cannot be attacked without undermining all human civilization.

Requesting that Your Excellency kindly convey to His Excellency the President Our cordial greetings and heartfelt wishes, We invoke upon him, upon the Republic of China, upon you and your new mission, the richest blessings and favours of Heaven.

*AAS61 (1969), p.322.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. VII, p.233-234.

L'Osservatore Romano23.4.1969, p.1.

L’Attività della Santa Sede 1969, p.177-178.

ORa n.18 p.5.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See