Sabato 23 marzo 1957. Sono nella Sala del Trono gli appartenenti alla Accademia Americana in Roma, con a capo il Direttore, Signor L. P. Roberts. Nel gruppo notati i rappresentanti delle varie Associazioni: pittori, scultori, architetti, musicisti, cultori di studi classici.

This is a group of scholars and students, who have heard the call of Rome : the Rome of the Caesars, the Rome

of the early Christian Martyrs, mediaeval and more modern Rome. It was a pleasure for Us to accede to your request and to welcome you here this morning, to welcome to the « Colle Vaticano », lower in eminence, it is true, than the seven hills famed in story, but no less rich in history and precious treasures, seat of that spiritual power that spans the centuries, reaching back to the day, when Paul of Tarsus first met the Roman brethren come out as far as Appius' Forum and the Three Taverns (Act. 28, 15), only later, when his prison days were over, to leave the city crossing the pointed shadow of Cestius tomb thrown athwart the road that led to Ostia.

If « history is witness for the ages, a light to truth, nurse of the memory, instructor of life », as the eloquent Cicero would have it—« Historia vero testis temporum, lux veritatis, vita memoriae, magistra vitae » (de Orat. 1. II cap. IX n. 36), is it surprising that, together with its helpmate archaeology, it should be found to assist the monuments of antiquity to leave their deepest impress on one, to allow one even to share more intimately the genius of the noblest of Latin poets and the most eminent sculptors and painters? Amid the scenes around which for so many generations the history of the world revolved, in an atmosphere of art and stirred by the inspiration of masterpieces, the spirit of genuine, human culture will expand and be lifted up to heights, where the sweet voice of Israel's singer reaches the soul and its echo is heard in praise of Him, Who is supreme Beauty, transcending all that stone and song and canvas can produce (cfr. Ps. 102).

We are particularly happy to add Our word of encouragement to you in your studies and research. Even the Arts and Sciences can forge a link that will bind all peoples more closely together under God.

*Discorsi e Radiomessaggi di Sua Santità Pio XII, XIX,Diciannovesimo anno di Pontificato, 2 marzo 1957 - 1° marzo 1958, p. 55Tipografia Poliglotta Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See