ADDRESS OF POPE LEO XIVTO AN ECUMENICAL DELEGATION FROM FINLAND

Monday, 19 January 2026

[Multimedia]

_________________________________

Your Eminence,Your Excellencies,Dear brothers and sisters,

On the occasion of your ecumenical pilgrimage to Rome, I offer you my warmest greetings, as you celebrate alsothe Feast Day of Saint Henrik. In particular, I welcome Archbishop Tapio Luoma: thank you for your thoughtful words, in which you referred to the 750thanniversary of the Archdiocese of Turku, and conveyed a message also from the President of the Republic of Finland, Mr Alexander Stubb, to whom I am grateful. I likewise greet Archbishop Elia of Helsinki and all Finland, and Bishop Raimo Goyarrola of Helsinki, who represent the Orthodox and Catholic faithful of Finland respectively.

Your visit to Rome is happily being made during the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, whose theme this year is taken from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians: “There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to the one hope of your calling” (4:4). This hope has its sure foundation in the “one Baptism for the forgiveness of sins” (as we receive in the Nicene-Constantinopolitan Creed), which is the very root of all Christian fraternity. At a time when people are often tempted by a sense of hopelessness, we have the essential mission, as Christian messengers of hope, to bring the Lord’s light into the darkest corners of our world. Although theJubilee of Hopehas now concluded with the recent closing of the Holy Door of Saint Peter’s Basilica, our Christian hope knows no end and no limit. Thus, encouraged and strengthened by the grace of Jesus Christ, who is the very incarnation of hope for all, we are called and sent out to bear witness to this saving truth with edifying words and charitable deeds.

In this regard, I appreciate the many signs of hope to be found among the Christians of Finland. In particular, I was pleased to learn that Finland has been described as “a model country for ecumenism.” Indeed, I know that the bishops of Helsinki, in a trilateral Orthodox-Lutheran-Catholic declaration, are seeking to promote a “culture of hope, dignity, and compassion,” and have jointly affirmed that “the development of palliative and end-of-life care must continue.” It is also noteworthy that the Catholic Nordic Bishops’ Conference has acknowledged the document of the National Catholic-Lutheran Dialogue, “Communion in Growth,” in its own “Reception Statement” last September, calling it a “valuable milestone on the ecumenical journey.” Such examples of cooperation, together with the long-standing tradition of jointly celebrating Saint Henrik’s Day, are eloquent signs of a practical and fruitful ecumenism, and can serve to encourage the Sixth Phase of the International Catholic-Lutheran Dialogue, which begins next month. I am sure that Bishop Goyarrola, as Co-Chair, will bring these positive experiences of Finnish ecumenism to this Dialogue.

Dear friends, with these thoughts, I wish you an enjoyable and productive visit to Rome. May you be strengthened as “bearers of hope” through the intercession of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and Saint Henrik. Assuring you of my prayers, I gladly invoke upon you,and all those you represent, the abundant blessings of Almighty God.

And as a sign of our friendship in Christ, I would now liketoinvite all of you, all ofus, to pray together the Our Father in English:

Our Father…

Thank you very much.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See