APOSTOLIC JOURNEYTO THE FAR EAST AND MAURITIUS

MEETING WITH THE ORGANIZING COMMITTEEOF THE VISIT IN INDONESIA

ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II

Apostolic Nunciature, JakartaFriday, 13 October 1989

Dear Brother Bishops,Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,Dear Friends,

As my pastoral visit draws to a close, I am indeed happy to have this opportunity of expressing my deep gratitude to all of you here present, who have cooperated so generously and effectively in making this visit such a wonderful success. I offer these few words in the hope that through you I may reach the thousands of people who have made it possible for me to fulfil my mission to confirm in faith my Catholic brothers and sisters of Indonesia.

My heartfelt gratitude goes in a particular way to my brother bishops who extended the initial invitation and who have been so persevering in their desire that I visit Indonesia. There are, of course, many others not represented at this meeting whom I cannot fail to mention with special thanks, and I am sure that in doing so I echo the sentiments of my brother bishops.

I am thinking in the first place of His Excellency, President Suharto, for the invitation which he officially extended to me and for the extremely generous hospitality offered to me and those accompanying me on this visit. The exquisite courtesy shown to all of us is yet another reminder that the reputation enjoyed by Indonesians for being an extraordinarily hospitable people is indeed well deserved. A word of sincere appreciation must also go to the Ministers of the Government and State officials who met and accompanied me, to the security forces and to all who helped in many ways to assure the orderly and smooth running of the visit. Without the assistance of the Indonesian Air Force it would not have been possible to carry out my desire to travel to far distant parts of the archipelago. And let us not forget the media – television, radio, and the press – who have brought the events of these days to millions of Indonesians who could not, of course, be present in person.

To all of you I express the fervent hope that your many efforts will bring abundant fruits in the life of the Church in this country. I join you in praying for this intention as I assure you of my continual prayers for the peace and prosperity of your beloved Indonesia and for the wellbeing of all her people.

Thank you very much and God bless you all.

© Copyright 1989 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See