ADDRESS OF PAUL VITO THE AMBASSADOR OF THE NETHERLANDS TO THE HOLY SEE*

Thursday, 23 October 1975

Mr Ambassador,

We thank you heartily for the kind words you have just spoken regarding us. We also wish to express to you how much we appreciate the sentiments that you transmitted to us on behalf of Her Majesty Queen Juliana, and we beg you kindly to convey to your Sovereign the respectful and cordial good wishes we form for her august person and the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

On this day when you assume the office of representing your noble country to the Holy See in the capacity of Ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary, we form the best wishes for the accomplishment of your high mission beside distinguished representatives of numerous peoples of all the continents. This happy circumstance enables us to express once more the sentiments of affection we feel for the dear Dutch nation, so rich in vitality, always quick to engage in generous initiatives, a large number of which are inspired by its Christian traditions and, among them, we will recall particularly the meritorious contribution made by so many of its sons to the work of evangelization and human 'advancement in the world.

You recalled briefly, Your Excellency, the main orientations recently set forth in the Address of the Throne delivered by Her Majesty the Queen; they already inspire the international commitments of your country. We are convinced, as we have had occasion to recall repeatedly, that the active and dedicated service of peace is not only the best service that a country can render humanity, but also the best way of ensuring its own future in a human way.

We rejoice, therefore, to see the Netherlands take seriously the duties which are those of all the developed countries with regard to the underprivileged ones. We hope that, in all fields in which an exact perception of all the ethical dimensions, of man, on the family plane as on the social level, conditions the effectiveness of specifically economic measures, this just conception will inspire and sustain an action that sets out to be generous and disinterested. The Catholic Church, the specific role of which is to bring to men the message of salvation contained in the Gospel, cannot but rejoice when she sees the guidelines of a country that is so dear to her for so many reasons, inspired by a really human ideal, and she warmly invites all her sons to collaborate in this effort.

This will indicate to you in what spirit we receive you today, Mr Ambassador. Renewing to you our wishes for the successful accomplishment of your mission, we ask the Lord to grant you, and the people of the Netherlands and their rulers, the abundance of his blessings.

*ORa n.46 p.4.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See