JOHN PAUL II

ANGELUS

Fifth Sunday of Lent, 13 March 2005

At noon, seated at a window on the 10th floor of the Gemelli Polyclinic, the Holy Father blessed and spoke briefly to the faithful gathered in the square below. Archbishop Leonardo Sandri, Substitute of the Secretariat of State, then read the prayer of the Angelus. The event was relayed via television to St Peter's Square, while the Holy Father viewed images of the faithful in the Square.

Dear Brothers and Sisters,

1. In these days of my hospital stay here at the Gemelli, I have been particularly aware ofthe presence and attentionof so many people who work in the mass media. Today I want to offer them a word of gratitude, for I am well aware of the sacrifices they make in carrying out theirappreciated service, thanks to which the faithful in every part of the world can feel that I am closer and can accompany me with their affection and prayers.

2. In our epoch of global communications the mass media play a very important role. Those who work in this sector, who must constantly provide timely information respectful of human dignity and attentive to the common good, also have a great responsibility.

In this season ofLent,which is an invitation to draw more abundantly from theWord of God,I am eager to recall that it is also possible to find spiritual nourishmenton the radio, television and Internet.I am grateful to those who dedicate themselves to these new forms of evangelization, making the most ofthe mass media.

3. Lastly, let us pray to Mary Most Holy so that she will help us to prepare properly for Holy Week, which begins next Sunday. I hope to see many young people in St Peter's Square taking part in the solemn Palm Sunday liturgy that is a spiritual preparation for theWorld Youth Day, scheduled to take place in Cologne, Germany.

After the recitation of the Angelus, the Holy Father said:

Dear brothers and sisters, thank you for your visit. Long live Wadowice! I greet the Legionaries of Christ. A happy Sunday and a good week to all!

© Copyright 2005 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See