ADDRESSOF THE HOLY FATHERPOPE JOHN PAUL IITO MEMBERS OF THE"PRO PETRI SEDE"ASSOCIATION

Saturday, 28 November 1998

Dear General Chaplain,Dear Members of the Association Pro Petri Sede,

1. Faithful to a now well-established custom, you have come to meet the Successor of Peter to offer him the proceeds of the collection you organized in the Benelux countries. Thank you for this gesture which I greatly appreciate, because it expresses your devotion to the Pope and to his mission! To your generous offering you have added a very beautiful book of art as well as a volume of the periodical that presents your association’s activities. You know St Paul’s advice to the Christians of Corinth: “Each one must do as he has made up his mind ... for God loves a cheerful giver” (2Cor9:7). I am pleased to note your desire to live according to the Apostle’s words. A sense of sharing among brothers and sisters is an important witness to offer people, so that all may increase their sense of solidarity.

2. As your association’s name indicates, your concern is to work “for” the “See of Peter”, to help it fulfil its mission of charity throughout the world. In affirming your readiness to support this See, you share in the Church’s concern for those who need our help and you adhere to Christ more firmly. May faith in Christ and the desire to help establish his kingdom strengthen your work and make you men and women of action and contemplation!

3. Dear friends ofPro Petri Sede, be assured of the prayers of the Successor of Peter. May your stay in Rome enable you to return to your country strengthened in faith, hope and love! Once again you have been able to experience first-hand the universality of the Church and to become aware of the journey made by thousands of pilgrims who come here to pray in the place where the Apostle Peter gave his supreme witness to Christ, his Teacher and Lord. You have offered the witness of your generosity to his Successor.

May the Lord preserve you each day! As I entrust to Our Lady’s intercession each of you, your families and everyone in Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg who has made a contribution to your collection, I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing to you all.

© Copyright 1998 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See