REFLECTION OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IION THE SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTIONOF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY

Piazza di Spagna, 8 December 2000

1. Today, 8 December, Romanshave once again made a devout pilgrimageto this historic Piazza di Spagna,where in 1856 Bl. Pius IX wanted to erectthis Marian monument to recall the promulgationof the dogma of the Immaculate Conception.

We pay homage to Mary Most Holy,preserved from the contagion of original sinand from any other hint of sinfrom the very first moment,in virtue of the merits of her Son,Jesus Christ, our only Redeemer.

As I do every year, I willingly joinin the offering of this traditional floral tribute,an eloquent symbol of unanimous entrustmentto the Immaculate Heart of the Lord's Mother.

2. In the context of the Great Jubilee,the truth of faith which the Church professesand proclaims today resoundswith exceptional clarity:"I will put enmitybetween you and the woman,and between your seed and her seed;he shall bruise your head" (Gn 3: 15).

Prophetic words of hope,echoing since the dawn of history!They foretell the victory that Jesus,"born of woman" (Gal 4: 4),would win over Satan, the prince of this world.

"He shall bruise your head":the Son's victoryis the Mother's victory, the victoryof the Immaculate Servant of the Lord,who intercedes for us as advocate of mercy.This is the mystery we celebrate today;this is the proclamation we renew with faithat the foot of this Marian column.

Rome, cradle of history and civilization,chosen by God as the see of Peterand his successors, land sanctifiedby numerous martyrs and witnesses of the faith,opens her arms this day to the entire world.

Rome, centre of the Catholic faith,speaks on behalf of the Christian peoplescattered across the five continentsand proclaims with joyful faith:in you, Mary, Love has triumphed.

3."I will put enmity between youand the woman...".Do not thesemysterious words from the Book of Genesissum up the dramatic truth of all human history?At the end of its work 35 years ago,the Second Vatican Ecumenical Council recalledthat history, in its deepest reality,is the scene of "an arduous struggleagainst the powers of darkness, which startedat the world's beginning and will continue,as the Lord tells us, until the last day"(Gaudium et spes,n. 37).

This relentless conflict involves man,every human being, who "has to strugglecontinuously to be allied with what is good,and only with great effort and the help of God'sgrace can he achieve his own inner unity" (ibid.).

4. Immaculate Virgin, Mother of the Saviour,the ages tell of your motherly presencesupporting the pilgrim people on the pathsof history. To you we raise our eyes andask you to sustain us in the struggle against eviland in the effort to do good. Keep us under yourmotherly protection, Virgin all fair and all holy!Help us go forward into the new millenniumclothed with that humility which made youbeloved above all in the sight of the Most High.

May the fruits of this Jubilee Year not be wasted!In your hands we place the future that awaits us,invoking your constant protection on the wholeworld. Therefore, like the Apostle John,we want to take you into our home (cf.Jn19: 27).

Stay with us, Mary, stay with us always!Ora pro nobis, intercede pro nobis,ad Dominum Iesum Christum!

Amen.

© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See