VISIT OF HIS HOLINESSJOHN PAUL IITO LORETOANGELUSEsplanade of MontorsoSunday, 5 September 2004

VISIT OF HIS HOLINESSJOHN PAUL IITO LORETO

ANGELUS

Esplanade of MontorsoSunday, 5 September 2004

Dear Friends,

1. At the end of this intense celebration, I would like once again to express to you my joy at being able to be with you. May you always be available to the voice of the Lord Jesus!

Just as he needed Mary'sfiattobecome flesh, so his Gospel also needs your "yes" in order tobecome historyin the contemporary world.

2. A very special greeting to the pilgrims from the Archdiocese of Barcelona and the Diocese of Vic, who are accompanied by Cardinal Ricardo María Carles, by Archbishop Lluís Martínez Sistach of Barcelona, by the Bishop of Vic and by the other Catalan Bishops.

The new Blessed is a great honour for your Land. His figure as a man, doctor and priest, is a shining example for the Christians of our time.

I also cordially greet the pilgrims from other Dioceses in Spain and in Latin America who, together with their Bishops, have taken part in the International Congress of Catholic Action.

Catholic Action is and wants to be the school at which people learn tochoose God with all their heartand to follow Christ as the one Lord of our life.

3. Dear Friends, I invite you to renew your "yes" and I consign to youthree duties:  the firstis "contemplation":  strive to walkon the path of holiness,keeping your gaze fixed on Jesus, the one Teacher and Saviour of all.

Thesecond dutyis "communion": endeavour to promotethe spirituality of unitywith the Pastors of the Church, with all the brethren in the faith and with the other ecclesial associations. Be the leaven of dialogue with all people of good will.

Thethird dutyis "mission": as lay people, takethe leaven of the Gospelto homes and schools, to places of work and recreation. The Gospel is a word of hope and salvation for the world.

May the sweet Lady of Loreto obtain for you fidelity to your vocation, generosity in carrying out your daily duties and enthusiasm in dedicating yourselves to the mission that the Church entrusts to you!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See