ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHERTO MEMBERS OF THE POPE'SWORLDWIDE PRAYER NETWORK FOUNDATION

Hall of PopesThursday, 23 January 2025

[Multimedia]

_________________

Dear brothers and sisters, welcome!

I greet the new Director, Father Cristóbal Fones. I wish him well in his work and express my gratitude to Father Fornos – he did a very good job; he is great – for his service. Father Fornos was “creative”.

My thanks go to all of you: the members of the International Team, the Continental Coordinators, the Board of Directors, the permanent Partners and, in particular, those who support the Foundation thereby ensuring stability and continued progress in its work.

I am pleased that you have joyfully received the Encyclical LetterDilexit Nos, on the human and divine love of the Heart of Jesus Christ, for you can find therein substantial nourishment for fostering the spirituality of your apostolate. Indeed, I am glad that you call this spirituality “The Way of the Heart”. I would like to “read” this expression in a twofold sense: it is the journey of Jesus, of his Sacred Heart, through the mystery of his incarnation, passion, death and resurrection; and it is also the journey of our own hearts, wounded by sin, which allow themselves to be conquered and transformed by love. On this journey of the heart, as ever we are guided by our Mother, Mary, who goes before us on the pilgrimage of faith and hope, and who teaches us to hold – to hold – in our hearts the words and deeds of Jesus. Do not forget this action: to hold. As you well know, this is the work of the Holy Spirit: our hearts cannot journey with Christ without the living water of the Holy Spirit.

Dear sisters and brothers, I think that the Worldwide Prayer Network will make a very important contribution to the Jubilee, helping individuals and communities to live the spirit of the Holy Year as a journey in which prayer and compassion, prayer and closeness to the least among us, prayer and works of mercy are inseparably combined. Thank you, thank you very much!

Please move forward joyfully, always joyfully, working together. I give you my heartfelt blessing. Thank you!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See