GENERAL AUDIENCE OF JOHN PAUL IIWednesday, 7 May 2003

Dear Brothers and Sisters,

1. Today I would like to reflect on theapostolic journeywhich I was able to makeinSpainlast Saturday and Sunday and whose theme was:"Seréis mis testigos -You will be my witnesses".

I thank the Lord for allowing me to visit that noble and beloved nation for the fifth time, and I renew the expression of my cordial gratitude to the Cardinal Archbishop of Madrid, to the Pastors and the entire Church of Spain, to Their Majesties the King and Queen and also to the Head of Government and the other Authorities who welcomed me with such affectionate attention.

From the moment I arrived, I was able to express the esteem the Successor of Peter has for that portion of the people of God which - for almost 2,000 years - has been a pilgrim in the land of Iberia and has playedan important role in the evangelizationof Europe and of the world. At the same time, I wanted to express my appreciation for the social progress the country has made, inviting it to continue to base its development on theauthentic and perennial valuesthat constitutethe precious heritageof the entire European continent.

2. The twoprincipal momentsof my pastoral pilgrimage were the big meeting with young people on Saturday afternoon, and the holy Mass for the canonization of five Blesseds on Sunday morning.

At the Cuatros Vientos Air Base in Madrid, the vigil with theyoung people,in the context of the prayer of theRosarygave me an opportunity to propose once again in summary form the message of my Apostolic LetterRosarium Virginis Mariaeand of the Year of the Rosary which we are celebrating. I invited the young people to be increasinglymen and women of strong interiority,ceaselessly contemplating, together with Mary, Christ and his mysteries. Indeed, this is the most effective antidote to thesnares of consumerismto which people today are exposed. It is urgently necessary to counter the suggestion of thefleeting valuesof the visible world, broadcast by a certain type of media, with thelasting valuesof the spirit, which can only be achieved by entering once again into one's own interiority through contemplation and prayer.

I was then delighted to note that the young are increasingly able toplay a lead role in the new evangelizationamong their peers and are ready to devote their energies to the service of Christ and of his Kingdom. I entrust to the Virgin the youth of Madrid and of all Spain, who are the future and the hope of the Church and of society in that great nation.

3. The following daythe solemn Eucharistic celebrationtook place in Plaza de Colón in the city centre. In the presence of the Royal Family, the Episcopate and the Authorities of the country, before a vast gathering that included representatives of all the ecclesiastical sectors, I had the joy ofcanonizing five of Spain's children:Pedro Poveda Castroverde, priest and martyr;José María Rubio y Peralta, priest; and the women religious,Genoveva Torres Morales,Angela de la CruzandMaría Maravillas of Jesus.

These authenticdisciples of Christ and witnesses of his Resurrectionare an example for Christians throughout the world:  finding in prayer the necessary strength, they were able to carry out the tasks that God entrusted to them in the contemplative life, in the pastoral ministry, in the field of education, in the apostolate of preaching retreats and in charity to the poor. May the believers and ecclesial communities of Spain be inspired by them in particular, so that this blessed land of God will continue, also in our time, to produceabundant fruits of Gospel perfection.

To this end, I urged the Christians of Spain toremain faithful to the Gospel,to defend and promotethe unity of the family,and to preserve and renew continuouslythe Catholic identitythat is the boast of the nation. It will be through the perennial values of its tradition that this noble country will be able to make its own effective contribution to building the new Europe.

4. This fifthApostolic Visit to Spainhas confirmed a deep conviction of mine:  the old European nations have preserved theirChristian soul,which ispart of the "genius" and history of their respective peoples.Secularization is unfortunately threatening the fundamental values, but the Church intends to work constantly to keep this spiritual and cultural tradition alive.

Appealing to thegreatness of the Spanish soulformed by solid human and Christian principles, I wanted to address to the young people especially Christ's words:"You will be my witnesses".I repeat these words today, assuring the Church and the people of Spain, as well as all of you present here, of my prayers, reinforced by a special Apostolic Blessing.

***

To the English-speaking pilgrims present at this Audience, especially those from England, Scotland, Finland, the Russian Federation, India, Canada and the United States of America, I offer special greetings. Upon all of you I cordially invoke the grace and peace of the risen Saviour.

To young people, the sick and newly-weds

I now address theyoung people,thesickand thenewly-weds.Tomorrow is the Feast of Our Lady of Pompei. I invite you, dearyoung people,to imitate Mary and always to trust in her motherly protection. May she help you to bring serenity wherever there is sorrow and loneliness. Dearsick people,I hope that you will live your condition with the help of the Blessed Virgin, confidently abandoning yourselves to the Lord's will. May Our Lady sustain you, dearnewly-weds,so that your reciprocal fidelity may be a source of joy and peace.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See