ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER JOHN PAUL IITO THE MEMBERSOF THE "PRO PETRI SEDE" ASSOCIATION

Thursday 12 October 2000

Ladies and Gentlemen,

I cordially greet you on the occasion of the pilgrimage of thePro Petri SedeAssociation. In this Jubilee Year you are continuing your tradition of coming to bring the Holy Father the donation of generous benefactors in Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, thus uniting the charity of the universal Church more closely with that of Peter's Successor.

The Jubilee is an invitation to conversion of heart, in order to return to God and to experience deeply the love of our heavenly Father, who welcomes us and wants to make us a holy people. We are called to radiate this love we receive from the Lord to those around us, thus bearing witness to our faith, which is an eloquent sign in the eyes of the world.

From this standpoint, your action is particularly important and necessary in showing God's mercy; it stems from "charity, which opens our eyes to the needs of those who are poor and excluded" (Incarnationis mysterium,n. 12) and spurs us to live as brothers and sisters, beyond differences of race, culture and religion. Your action belongs in this context. I am sure that your association's generous benefactors know that by this gesture they are extending a hand to the poorest of the poor so that they can get back on their feet, live in dignity as befits their nature and take greater charge each day of their own development, so that brotherhood and solidarity will continue to grow among all  people. Sharing  is  also  an  important task in furthering justice and peace.

I ask you then to express my deep thanks and gratitude to all the members of thePro Petri SedeAssociation and to the faithful of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands who, by welcoming the poor and the stranger, are living the Gospel ideal of spiritual and material sharing. As I entrust them to the intercession of the Virgin Mary, whom we particularly honour in this month of the Rosary, I cordially grant my Apostolic Blessing to all.

© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See