PHONE CALL BY POPE FRANCISTO PARTICIPANTS IN THE 36th ANNUAL WALKING PILGRIMAGEFROM MACERATA TO LORETO

Saturday, 7 June 2014

Dear Young People who are making a walking pilgrimage from Macerata to Loreto!

This year again I wanted to make myself present among you, at least virtually. This is a joy. I am truly pleased that your pilgrimage this year is taking place on the night before the feast of the Holy Spirit — Pentecost — and of the prayer meeting which will take place in the Vatican tomorrow, calling for peace in the Holy Land, in the Middle East and in all the world. I ask you all to please join us in asking God, through the intercession of Our Lady of Loreto, that on earth once again the song of the angels may resound: “Glory to God in heaven and peace to men” (cf. Lk 2:14).

Dear young people, your theme is “God is the Lord of surprises!”, and this is true! Do not be afraid, therefore, to dream of a more just world: to ask, to seek, to deepen. You know that faith is not an inheritance we receive from others, faith is not a product you can buy, rather it is a loving response that we give freely and that day by day we build patiently, between successes and failures.

Do not be afraid to throw yourselves into God’s arms. God will not ask anything of you in return, except blessing that which you asked and returning it to you 100 times over!

Do not be discouraged by those who have lost or are fearful and who want to dash your dreams, who want to lock you into their dark mentality instead of letting you fly in the light of hope! Please don’t fall into this mediocrity! A mediocrity that lowers us and makes us grey, but life isn’t grey, life is for betting on grand ideals and great things.

Negativity is contagious but so is positivity; desperation is contagious but so is joy: do not follow negative people but continue to radiate light and hope around you! And know that hope doesn’t disappoint, it never deludes!

Nothing is lost with God but without Him everything is lost; open your hearts to Him and trust in Him and your eyes will see his ways and his splendour (cf. Pr 23:26).

Tonight when you are praying for peace in Loreto, near Our Lady, do not forget to pray for me too, I need it!

Many thanks, go forward and happy walking!

Pray for, not against something!

Good night. May the Lord bless you and may you go in peace!

May Almighty God bless you: the Father, Son and the Holy Spirit! May Our Lady accompany you! Thank you!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See