MESSAGE OF POPE FRANCISTO THE PRESIDENT OF THE GOVERNORATE OF VATICAN CITY STATEON THE OCCASION OF THE ELEVATIONOF THE SECRETARY GENERALTO THE DIGNITY OF BISHOP

Your Most Reverend Eminence,

On 30 August 2013, I appointed Fr Fernando Vérgez Alzaga, L.C., as Secretary General of the Governorate of Vatican City State. He is called, therefore, to perform all the administrative functions pertaining to that office, to coordinate and monitor the work of the various managerial departments of the aforesaid Governorate, and to supervise the work of collaborators and employees of the State of Vatican City.

There is no doubt that the Governorate employees in their specific sectors form a significant part of the particular working community made up of men and women, priests, religious and laity, who spend themselves in the various Dicasteries and Offices at the service of the Holy See.

In accordance withJohn Paul II’s Letter on the meaning of work performed for the Apostolic See(20 November 1982), this community is above all marked by the “unified character of the tasks, however different”. What must be kept in mind at all times are the principle truths of Catholic doctrine on human labour and at the same time its peculiar relationship to the Apostolic See, which is in direct contact with the Successor Peter.

The specific nature of the Apostolic See, which has a spiritual and pastoral mission favouring the Church of Rome and the universal Church, carries with it a special responsibility for those who are linked to it through the bond of work and the duty of scrupulous faithfulness in all the tasks and duties assigned with diligence, professionalism and honesty in life.

Pope John Paul II adds in the aforementioned Letter that “the employees of the Holy See should, therefore, have a profound conviction that their work involves above all, an ecclesial responsibility to live in a spirit of authentic faith and that the juridical-administrative aspects of the relationship with the Apostolic See are to be viewed in a special light”.

That said, it is up to the Secretary General of the Governorate to directly attend to the human and Christian formation of employees and collaborators; to coordinate the priests in charge of spiritual assistance who are present in various areas; to promote appropriate initiatives especially in conjunction with pastoral programmes of the universal Church and at important periods of the Liturgical year.

In view of these duties I have decided to raise Fr Fernando Vérgez Alzaga, L.C., to the dignity of bishop.

Please have cognizance of the same, Your Eminence, with my Apostolic Blessing.

From the Vatican, 7 October 2013, Feast of the Blessed Virgin Mary of the Rosary

FRANCIS

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See