8th WORLD YOUTH DAY

JOHN PAUL II

ANGELUS

Cherry Creek State Park, DenverSolemnity of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin MarySunday, 15 August 1993

I now invite all taking part in this concluding Liturgy of the "World Youth Day", and all who are in contact with us through radio and television, to turn in spirit to Mary, Mother of the Redeemer, and to join in reciting the "Angelus" prayer. This traditional prayer invites us to meditate on Mary’s own pilgrimage of faith.

With trust we appeal to her:

Mary, you are the "model of the Church in faith, charity and perfect union with Christ" (Lumen Gentium, 63). You freely accepted God’s will, made known to you at the Annunciation. You bore in your womb the Word made flesh, who dwelt among us as your Son. You watched him grow "in wisdom and age and grace"(Luc2,52) in the home of Nazareth. Your path of discipleship led even to the foot of the Cross, where Jesus made you the Mother of all his followers (Cfr.Io19,27).

Mary, you are the Mother of the Lord of life who stood beneath the Tree of life. At the Cross you became our spiritual mother and, from heaven, you continue to intercede for us who are still making our way towards the Father’s house(Cfr.Lumen Gentium, 62).

Mary, Mother of the Church, in union with you we thank the Blessed Trinity for all that this "World Youth Day" has accomplished in the lives of the young people who have followed the Holy Year Cross to Denver.

Mary, Immaculate Virgin, pray for these young people that they may "have life and have it to the full"(Cfr.Io10,10). Accompany them as they go forth to beheralds of that divine Life which alone can satisfy the hunger of the human heart!Like you, may they see in the Cross of Christ the call of Divine Love which turns death into life, despair into hope, and sadness into unending joy.

Blessed Mother, assist all the young people who are struggling to give a definitive and responsible "Yes" to the Lord’s call to the priesthood, to the religious life, or to a special consecration in the Church. Obtain for them the courage and hope they need to overcome all obstacles and to follow closely in the footsteps of your Divine Son.

We ask you to watch over all of us gathered here as we continue our pilgrim way to the true source of life.For this pilgrimage must continue!It must continue in our lives. It must continue in the life of the Church as she looks towards the Third Christian Millennium. It must continue as "a new Advent", a time of hope and expectation, until the return of the Lord in glory. Our celebration of this "World Youth Day" has been a stop along the way, a moment of prayer and refreshment,but our journey must lead us on.

Today I wish to announce that the next "World Youth Day" will take place at the beginning of 1995 in Manila in the Philippines. In this way, our pilgrimage will take us to the vast and vital Continent of Asia. The Holy Year Cross will lead us to a meeting with the faithful, generous people of the Philippines.

Mary of the new Advent, we implore your protection on the the preparations that will now begin for that next Meeting.

Mary, "full of grace", we entrust the next "World Youth Day" to you!

Mary, assumed into Heaven, we entrust the young people of the world to you!

After the Angelus:

The time has come for us to say goodbye, until we meet again.

I also mention Archbishop Stafford and all the volunteers of the Church here in Denver who have worked for months to prepare this Day. Our gratitude goes to the local radio stations and the translators who have made it possible to follow the "World Youth Day" in the principal languages, to everyone in radio and television who are bringing "World Youth Day" to audiences in many countries.

To Archbishop Keeler, President of the Bishops’ Conference and all the Bishops for their cooperation: thanks to the whole Church in the United States. To Archbishop Keeler, President of the Bishops’ Conference, and Monsignor Lynch and all their staff, to all the Cardinals and the Bishops for their cooperation. Thanks to the whole Church in the United States. A special thanks to all the Cardinals and Bishops who have become pilgrims together with their young people from all the continents. The "World Youth Day" has been a great event, and there has been a wonderful exchange of spiritual gifts and experiences between all the young people present. For all of this we must give praise and thanks to God. I wish to express my deepest and warm appreciation to the representatives of the other Churches: Christian Churches and Communities, as well as to the representatives of the various religious traditions who have taken such an active part in "World Youth Day".

In Spanish:

In French:

In German:

In Portuguese:

In Polish:

Kończy się Światowy Dzień Młodzieży, a dla Was – jego uczestników – rozpoczyna się misja, którą powierza Wam Chrystus. On na Was liczy. Tym, co tu przeżyliście, dzielcie się ze swymi kolegami i koleżankami w środowiskach, w których żyjecie, uczycie się czy pracujecie. Na tym apostolskim szlaku niech Wam towarzyszy opieka i wstawiennictwo Maryi, którą czcimy jako Królową Apostołów.

***

We all have celebrated, participated in the Eucharist. What is the Eucharist? Christ has given us life, his life, divine life, the pilgrim life – he was a pilgrim. He was a man – divine life, he is the Son of God.

We receive him, but he receives us and that is life, the full human life, the sacramental life, but that is also the future life, eternal life.

Thank you for all of us; I say it again, thank you, thank you for the life you gave us and that you are giving us, you are permitting us. Thank you through your Mother, Our Lady. In the day of her Assumption, thank you, Jesus Christ, the Son of the Eternal Father. In the name of the Father, the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See