APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO THE PHILIPPINES,PAPUA NEW GUINEA, AUSTRALIA AND SRI LANKA

10th WORLD YOUTH DAY

VIDEO MESSAGE OF THE HOLY FATHER JOHN PAUL IITO YOUTH TAKING PART IN THE WAY OF THE CROSS

ManilaFriday ,13 January 1995

"Unless I go the Spirit will not come to you"(Jn.16:7).

Dear young people,

1.These words of Jesus at the Last Supper speak to us of his return to the Father. As you follow theWay of the Cross in Luneta Park and through the streets of Manila, you will meditate on what this "going back to the Father" means.

2. In the inscrutable mystery of God’s design,"the Word became flesh and dwelt among us"(Jn.1:14). He took a body like ours, was born of the Virgin Mary... and through his death on the Cross he takes us – wayward and sinful humanity – back to the Father, so that we may live in the certain hope of the Resurrection. The manner of his going also was a part of the Father’s plan. We read in the Gospel: "The soldiers... threw a scarlet military cloak about him. Weaving a crown out of thorns, they placed it on his head... And kneeling before him, they mocked him... and when they had mocked him... they led him off to be crucified" (Mt.27:27-31).

3. The executioners stand for everyone who does evil in the sight of God. At times it even seems that evil is taking over, and that people are helpless to stop it. Young people askwhat can be done in the face of so much suffering, so much injustice, so much violence and death?

The Gospels speak of a man named Simon whom "they pressed into service to carry his cross" (Mt. 27:32) . And the weeping women who followed him all the way to the place of crucifixion (cf.Mt.27:55et al.). Tradition refers to a woman named Veronica who wiped the face of Jesus with a towel. The Gospel of Saint John tells us that "standing by the cross of Jesus were his motherand his mother’s sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary of Magdala", as well as "the disciple whom he loved" (Jn.19:25-26).

For us too, Jesus on the Cross becomesthe ultimate test of our faith and the judgement of God on our behavior.

4. The Tenth World Youth Day is holdinga day of solidarity with the suffering people of Rwanda. Overcome by the terrible evil that has borne down on them, our Rwandan brothers and sisters need your material aid, but they also need encouragementin restoring the sense of their dignity as sons and daughters of the living God. May they be heartened to know that you are making sacrifices for them, sacrifices which signify your real concern for brothers and sisters who are far away, but not forgotten.

5. Lord Jesus Christ: At the Last Supper you said: "Unless I go the Spirit will not come to you" (Jn.16.7).Send the Holy Spiritupon these young people, so that he may teach them to loveyourCross and the crosswhich belongs to each one of them personally.

From there, O Lord,send the Holy Spirit into the hearts of the young people gathered in Manila for the Tenth World Youth Day!May he help them to respond generously and fearlessly to your call:"As the Father sent me, so am I sending you"(Jn.20:21). Do this, for the glory of God the Father. Amen.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See