MESSAGE TO H.E. MR. LEE MYUNG-BAK,PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA,ON THE OCCASION OF THE G20 SUMMIT IN SEOUL

Mr. President,

The meeting about to take place in Seoul of Heads of States and Government of the world's twenty-two leading economies together with the Secretary-General of the United Nations Organization, the Presidency of the European Union and some regional Organizations, as well as the leaders of various specialized Agencies, is not only of global importance but also clearly expresses the significance and responsibility which Asia has acquired on the international scene at the beginning of the 21stcentury. The Korean Presidency of the Summit is a recognition of the significant level of economic development attained by your country, which is the first among those not belonging to the G8 to host the G20 and guide its decision in the world to alter the crisis. The Summit seeks solutions to quite complex questions, on which the future of upcoming generations depends and which therefore require the cooperation of the entire international community, based on the acknowledgement – which is shared and agreed by all peoples – of the primary and central value of human dignity, the final objective of the choices themselves.

The Catholic Church, in accordance with her specific nature, regards herself as involved and shares the concerns of the leaders who will take part in the Seoul Summit. I therefore encourage you to tackle the numerous serious problems facing you – and which, in a sense, face every human person today – bearing in mind the deeper reasons for the economic and financial crisis and giving due consideration to the consequences of the measures adopted to overcome the crisis itself, and to seek lasting, sustainable and just solutions. In doing so, it is my hope that there will be a keen awareness that the solutions adopted, as such, will work only if, in the final analysis, they are aimed at reaching the same goal: the authentic and integral development of man.

The world's attention focuses on you and it expects that appropriate solutions will be adopted to overcome the crisis, with common agreements which will not favor some countries at the expense of others. History, furthermore, reminds us that, no matter how difficult it is to reconcile the different socio-cultural, economic and political identities coexisting today, these solutions, to be effective, must be applied through combined action which, above all, respects the nature of man. It is decisive for the very future of humanity to show the world and history that today, thanks also to this crisis, man has matured to the point of being able to recognize that civilizations and cultures, like economic, social and political systems, can and must converge in a shared vision of human dignity, which respects the laws and requirements placed in it by God the Creator. The G20 will respond to the expectations placed in it and grant real success to future generations, if taking into consideration the various and sometimes contrasting problems afflicting the peoples of the earth, it is able to set out the characteristics of the universal common good and demonstrate its willingness to cooperate in order to attain it.

With these sentiments I invoke God's blessings on all taking part in the Seoul Summit and I avail myself of the occasion to renew to Your Excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.

From the Vatican, 8 November 2010

BENEDICTUS PP. XVI

© Copyright 2010 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See