ADDRESS OF POPE JOHN PAUL IITO THE AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF BELIZETO THE HOLY SEE*

Friday, 9 December 1983

Mr Ambassador,

I am pleased to accept the Letters accrediting you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Belize, and I thank you for the warm greetings which you have conveyed on behalf of the Government and people of your country.

Our meeting marks another important moment in the life of your young Nation, which has only recently achieved its independence. You are the first Ambassador of Belize to the Holy See. And your presence here today is a sign of the mutual respect which exists between us; at the same time, it expresses our common intention to deepen the bonds of understanding and trust which we enjoy, and to collaborate in the promotion of peace and justice through fruitful dialogue and dedication to the pursuit of truth.

It was a joy for me to visit Belize earlier this year, and, by doing so, to give expression to the esteem which I bear toward the beloved people of your land. The warm reception accorded to me on that memorable occasion will always remind me of the cordial hospitality and good will of Belizeans.

You have made reference, Mr Ambassador, to the good relations which exist between the Catholic Church and the Government of Belize and to the special contribution which the Church has made to the human and spiritual development of your people. I am happy that this has been the case, and I assure you of the Church’s desire to continue to contribute to the promotion and development of your country.

In welcoming Your Excellency as the first Ambassador of Belize to the Holy See, I assure you of the full cooperation and assistance of the Holy See in the fulfilment of your mission. I ask you to convey my best wishes to Her Excellency Dr Minita Gordon and the other authorities of your country. And I invoke the blessings of Almighty God upon you and your fellow-citizens.

*AAS 76 (1984), p.467.

Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. VI, 2 pp. 1290-1291.

L'Attività della Santa Sede 1983 pp. 869-870.

L’Osservatore Romano9-10.12.1983 p. 7.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.51 p.4.

© Copyright 1983 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See