ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE PAUL VITO THE AMBASSADOR OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLICTO THE HOLY SEE*

Thursday, 19 November 1970

Mr. Ambassador,

We have listened with attention and pleasure to the deferential words which Your Excellency has addressed to Us on the occasion of presenting the Letters which accredit you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Dominican Republic to the Holy See.

Your noble sentiments are particularly agreeable to Us, since they are those of the representative of a country which is so much loved by Us and which has the honour of being the first country in the New World that received the preaching of the Gospel. Your fellow citizens bear names, and possess precious architectural monuments which still recall the spirit of those first messengers of the faith, who brought the light of Christ and the torch of culture, and devoted their energies to elevating the human person and defending his rights.

It is along this line of action that the Church desires to give her services to the Dominican Republic; and she is striving to do so under the guidance of her Bishops, with the resolute work of her priests and generous cooperation from laity – all committed to a common apostolic and social task for the good of the community.

We Ourself – as Your Excellency has so kindly pointed out – have, as Father and Pastor, repeatedly exhorted Dominicans to peace and fraternal, social living; We have done so at painful moments, some of them not long distant.

We offer up fervent prayers in constant affection for that peace, active peace, external peace, and above all peace of hearts, just peace, built up through daily commitment on the part of all, peace in which the aspirations of all who yearn for better things may be met, a peace in which the hopes and efforts of the new generations may enjoy achievement.

Mr. Ambassador, We assure you of Our goodwill for the accomplishment of the high mission which you now undertake, and in doing so We cordially impart the Apostolic Benediction you have sought to Your Excellency and your family, to His Excellency the President of the Republic – whose greetings We deeply appreciate – and to the Government and all Our dearly beloved children in the Dominican Republic.

*ORa n.49 p.8.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See