LETTER OF PAUL VITO THE ARCHBISHOPS AND BISHOPS OF AUSTRALIA

Friday, 18 February 1972

To Our Venerable BrothersThe Archbishops and Bishops of Australia

Lent is a timeto pause and reflect-a time to prepare for the special celebration of Christ’s passion, death and resurrection.

The Lord’s paschal mystery was motivated by love for his Father and for mankind and there is no better preparation for the Easter feast than a renewed commitment to the love that inspired Christ to lay down his life and to take it up again (Cfr.Io. 10, 17).

Love is indeed the greatest of the virtues and true love of God must always find expression in love of neighbour; of necessity it means service rendered to others in the name of Christ.

We see in “Project Compassion” a wonderful means for all our beloved sons and daughters in Australia to join together in a spirit of fraternal sharing for the benefit of their fellowmen and thus to fulfil the will of Christ, who said: “In so far as you did this to one of the least of these brothers of mine, you did it to me” (Matth. 25, 40).

We are confident that the response to this Annual Lenten Family Campaign will once again be eloquent proof of how the Catholics of Australia understand the aspirations of the poor and needy.

Through their sharing your people hopefully will pursue Christ’s mission of uplifting mankind to the level of human development and dignity befitting all God’s children.

On this occasion we encourage you and your faithful-all the clergy, religious and laity of Australia-to continue their many works inspired by Christian love and rendered possible by Project Compassion and by the self-discipline that it supposes for each member of each family.

And while we express deep gratitude for all that you have already done and will do to show forth Christ’s love, we implore for all of you a full sharing in his paschal mystery and most cordially impart our Apostolic Blessing.

PAULUS PP. VI

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See