CONCERT OFFERED BY THE BAMBERGER SYMPHONIKER ORCHESTRAON THE OCCASION OF THE MILLENNIUM JUBILEE CELEBRATIONSOF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF BAMBERGADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVICourtyard of the Papal Summer Residence, Castel GandolfoTuesday, 4 September 2007

ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVI

Courtyard of the Papal Summer Residence, Castel GandolfoTuesday, 4 September 2007

Most Reverend and Dear Archbishop Schick,Honourable Mr Minister Goppel,Dear Brothers in the Episcopate and in the Priesthood,Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,

Perhaps it has happened to you as it has to me: the marvellous sound of the two symphonies made me forget daily life and transported me into the world of music which for Beethoven - as you mentioned, Mr Minister, at the beginning - meant "a revelation higher than any wisdom or philosophy". Music, in fact, has the capacity for taking one beyond oneself to the Creator of all harmony, inspiring within one resonances which are, as it were, in tune with the beauty and truth of God - with that reality which no human wisdom, no philosophy can ever express. This is also what Schubert meant when he said of a minuet by Mozart: "It is as though choirs of angels were taking part with their song". And like perhaps many of you, it is this that I have been able to experience this evening.

I would like to thank the Bamberger Symphoniker with all my heart, together with Jonathan Nott, their conductor. With the vast range of nuances in the quality of sound and the strong expressive power in the interpretation of the two musical masterpieces, you have reaffirmed the excellent fame of your orchestra. May your performances be a sort of revelation for many people in the future, too! Of course, I also extend my gratitude to those who organized this festive evening: to you, dear Archbishop, and to you, honourable Mr Minister, as well as to all those who with their generous support have made this concert possible. It is a gift that I interpret as the sign of a special bond of affection of the Archdiocese of Bamberg with the Successor of St Peter; indeed, for some centuries of its 1,000-year-old history your Diocese was under the immediate supervision of the Holy See. May your Jubilee Pilgrimage to the tombs of the Apostles and to the current Successor of Peter strengthen your faith and your joy in God, so that you may be his witnesses in daily life! For this, I ask God to pour out his Blessings upon you all.

© Copyright 2007 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See