EXTRAORDINARY JUBILEE OF MERCY

POPE FRANCIS

JUBILEE AUDIENCE

St Peter's SquareSaturday, 12 November 2016

[Multimedia]

Mercy and inclusion

Dear brothers and sisters, Good morning!

In this last Saturday Jubilee Audience, I would like to present an important aspect of mercy:inclusion. Indeed, God, in his design of love, does not want toexcludeanyone, but wants toincludeeveryone. For example, through Baptism, he makes us his children in Christ, members of his Body which is the Church. And we Christians are invited to use the same criteria: mercy is the way one acts, that style, with which we try toincludeothers in our lives, and avoid closing in on ourselves and our selfish securities.

In the passage from the Gospel of Matthew that we have just heard, Jesus addresses a truly universal invitation: “Come to me,allwho labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest” (11:28). No one is excluded from this call, because Jesus’ mission is to reveal the Father’s love to everyone. Our task is to open our hearts, to trust in Jesus and accept this message of love, which makes us enter into the mystery of salvation.

This aspect of mercy, inclusion, is manifested in opening one’s arms wide to welcome, without excluding; without labeling others according to their social status, language, race, culture or religion: there is, before us, only aperson to be loved as God loves them. The person whom I find at my work, in my neighbourhood, is a person to love, as God loves. “But he is from that country, or that other country, or of this religion, or another... He is a person whom God loves and I have to love him”. This is toinclude, and this isinclusion.

We encounter so many weary and oppressed people today! In the street, in public offices, in medical practices... Jesus’ gaze rests on each one of those faces, even through our eyes. And how is our heart? Is it merciful? And our way of thinking and acting, is itinclusive? The Gospel calls us to recognize, in the history of humanity, the design of agreat work of inclusion, which fully respects the freedom of every person, every community, every nation, and calls everyone to form a family of brothers and sisters, in justice, solidarity and peace, and to be part of the Church, which is the Body of Christ.

How true are Jesus’ words, which invite those who are tired and weary to come to Him to find rest! His arms outstretched on the cross show that no one is excluded from his love and his mercy, not even the greatest sinner: no one! We are all included in his love and in his mercy. The most immediate expression with which we feel welcomed and included in him is that of forgiveness. We all need to be forgiven by God. And we all need to encounter brothers and sisters who help us to go to Jesus, to open ourselves to the gift he has given us on the cross. Let us not hinder each other! Let us not exclude anyone! Rather, with humility and simplicity let us become instruments of the Father’s inclusive mercy. The inclusive mercy of the Father: it is like this. The Holy Mother Church prolongs in the world the great embrace of Christ who died and rose. Also this Square, with its colonnade, expresses this embrace. Let us engage in this movement of including others, to be witnesses of the mercy with which God has accepted and welcomed each one of us.

Special greetings:

I greet the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors taking part in today’s Audience, particularly those from Ireland and Pakistan. With prayerful good wishes that the present Jubilee of Mercy will be a moment of grace and spiritual renewal for you and your families, I invoke upon all of you joy and peace in our Lord Jesus Christ.

Dear brothers and sisters, live this last Saturday Audience of the Jubilee with faith, in order to experience forgiveness, mercy and the love of God in your life. I greet with particular affection you volunteers of the Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy. You have been great! You all have come from different countries, and I thank you for the valuable service you have provided so that pilgrims could live this experience of faith well. Over the course of these months, I have noticed your discreet presence in the Square with the Jubilee logo and have admired the dedication, patience and enthusiasm with which you have carried out your work. Thank you very much!

In particular, I extend a greeting toyoung people,the sickandnewlyweds. Yesterday we commemorated Saint Martin of Tours, the patron saint of beggars, whose 17th centenary of the birth we celebrate this year. May his example inspire in you, dearyoung people, especially you Erasmus students in Europe, the desire to perform acts of solidarity; may his faith in Christ the Lord sustain you, dearsick people, in the trials of disease; and may his moral rectitude remind you, dearnewlyweds, of the importance of values in the education of children.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See