ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWITO THE HOLY SEE*

Saturday 14, July 1973

Mr Ambassador,

It gives us pleasure to welcome you today and to receive the Letters accrediting you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Malawi. We thank you for your kind words, and would ask you to reciprocate the cordial greetings of your President, His Excellency Dr Hastings Kamuzu Banda.

You have affirmed your intention of working to strengthen the ties already existing between the Republic of Malawi and the Holy See, and you may be assured that this aim is fully shared. You have likewise spoken of your country’s development programme and of the efforts being made to combat ignorance, poverty, disease and the other obstacles that must be overcome if the well-being, both spiritual and material, of all citizens is to be ensured. We appreciate the acknowledgment given to the Church’s contribution to this work, and we avail ourself of the occasion to reiterate the Holy See’s firm intention to continue to collaborate, as far as it is able, in the furthering of these worthy aims.

The Church’s mission is a spiritual development and the full flowering of human potential can scarcely be attained unless the basic requirements for a peaceful and prosperous existence are first secured. Such are the motives that impel us to devote our energies to the pursuit of peace and justice in all parts of the world. The support of your President for our efforts in this sphere is deeply appreciated.

Invoking upon the Authorities and the beloved people of the Republic of Malawi abundant divine blessings, we express to you personally our cordial good wishes for the happy and successful accomplishment of your mission.

*AAS65 (1973), p.438.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. XI, p.724-725.

L’Attività della Santa Sede 1973, p.262.

L'Osservatore Romano,15.7.1973, p.1.

ORa n. 30 p.2.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See