APOSTOLIC LETTERISSUED MOTU PROPRIO

FIDELIS DISPENSATOR ET PRUDENS

OF HIS HOLINESS POPEFRANCIS

ESTABLISHING A NEW COORDINATING AGENCYFOR THE ECONOMIC AND ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRSOF THE HOLY SEE AND THE VATICAN CITY STATE

Fidelis dispensator et prudens (Lk 12:42)

As the faithful and prudent administrator has a vocation to care attentively for those goods that have been entrusted to him, so the Church is conscious of her call to safeguard and carefully administer her goods in light of her mission of evangelization, with special care for the needy. In particular, the responsibility of the economic and financial sectors of the Holy See is intimately linked to its own particular mission, not only in its service to the Holy Father in the exercise of his universal ministry but also with respect to how they correspond to the common good in light of integral human development.

After having considered carefully the findings of the Pontifical Commission for Reference on the Organization of the Economic-Administrative Structure of the Holy See (Chirograph, 18 July 2013) and having conferred with the Councilof Cardinals in drafting a reform of the Apostolic ConstitutionPastor Bonusand having heard the Council of Cardinals for the Study of the Organizational and Economic Questions of the Apostolic See, with this Apostolic Letter in the form of a Motu Proprio I adopt the following measures:

COUNCIL FOR THE ECONOMY

1. The Council for the Economy is established as an entity having oversight for the administrative and financial structures and activities of the dicasteries of the Roman Curia, the institutions linked tothe Holy See, and the Vatican City State.

2. The Council for the Economy is composed of 15 members, of whom 8 are chosen from Cardinals and Bishops reflecting the catholicity of the Church and 7 are lay experts of various nationalities with recognized professional financial competence.

3. The Council for the Economy ischaired by a Cardinal Coordinator.

SECRETARIAT FOR THE ECONOMY

4. The Secretariat for the Economy is established as a dicastery of the Roman Curia in conformity with the Apostolic ConstitutionPastor Bonus.

5. In keeping with the policies established by the Council for the Economy, the Secretariat is directly responsible to the Holy Father and is competent for the economic control and vigilance over the agencies mentioned in Point 1,including policies and procedures concerning purchasing and the suitable allocation ofhuman resources, with due regard to the competencies proper to each agency. The competence of the Secretariat therefore extends to all that in whatsoever manner concerns such material.

6. The Secretariat for the Economy is presided over by a Cardinal Prefect,who acts in collaboration with the Secretary of State. A Prelate Secretary General is charged with assisting the Cardinal Prefect.

AUDITOR GENERAL

7. An Auditor General is appointed by the Holy Father and isempowered to conduct audits of the agencies mentioned in Point 1.

STATUTES

8. The Cardinal Prefect is responsible for the preparation of the definitive Statutes of the Council for the Economy, the Secretariat for the Economy and the office of Auditor General. The Statutes are to be presentedquam primumfor approval to the Holy Father.

I dispose that everything here established have immediate, full and lasting force, also abrogating all norms to the contrary, and that the present Apostolic Letter issued Motu Propriobe published in the 24-25 February 2014 edition ofL’Osservatore Romanoand thereafter inActa Apostolicae Sedis.

Given in Rome, at Saint Peter’s, on 24 February of the year 2014, the first of my Pontificate.

FRANCISCUS

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See