APOSTOLIC JOURNEYTO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND CANADA

ACT OF ENTRUSTMENT TO THE VIRGIN MARY

PRAYER OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II

Dodger Stadium (Los Angeles)Wednesday, 16 September 1987

1. I wish at this time to turn my thoughts once more tothe Woman of faith and of all salvation history: Mary, the Mother of Jesus and Mother of his Church; Mary, the Patroness of the United States under the title of her Immaculate Conception.

I entrust to you, Virgin Mother of God,all the faithfulof this land. I entrust them to you, not only as individual men and women in the nobility of their personhood, but as the Christian community, living corporately the life of your divine Son.

I entrust to youmy brother bishopsin their great mission as servant pastors of God’s people, in communion with the Successor of Peter. I entrust to you allthe priests, who minister generously in the name of the Good Shepherd; allthe deaconsbearing witness to Christ’s servanthood; allwomen and men religiousproclaiming by their lives the holiness of God; all the laity working in virtue of their Baptism and Confirmation to order all temporal affairs according to the plan of God.

I entrust to youall the holy People of God- the pilgrim People of God - called to be mindful of their Christian dignity, called to conversion, called to eternal life.

In particular I entrust to youthe familiesof America, in their quest for holiness, in their struggle against sin, in their vocation to be vital cells in the Body of Christ. I ask you to bless allhusbands and wives, allfathers and mothers, and to confirm them in their high vocation of human love and openness to life. I entrust to you the children of this generation, asking you to preserve them in innocence, to protect them from all harm and abuse, and to let them grow up in a world of peace and justice and fraternal love.

I entrust to youall the women of the Churchand the cause of their true human advancement in the world and their ever fuller participation in the life of the Church, according to the authentic plan of God. May they discover in you, O Mary, and in the freedom that was yours - from that moment of supreme liberation in your Immaculate Conception - the secret of living totally their femininity in fulfilment, progress and love.

I commend to your protectionthe young peoplethat make up the future of the United States. I pray that in your Son Jesus Christ they may grasp the meaning of life, and come to understand deeply their call to serve their fellow human beings; that they may discover the profound fulfilment of chaste love, and the joy and strength that come from Christian hope.

I offer to your loving carethe elderly peoplewith all their sufferings and joys, and with their yet unfinished mission of service in your Church. I ask you to console and assistthe dying, and to renew within the whole community a sense of the importance of human life at every stage, even when it is weak and defenceless.

I ask you to assistthe single peoplewith their special needs and special mission. Give them strength to live according to the beatitudes and to serve with generosity and gladness.

2. I entrust to you allthose engaged in the great Christian struggle of life: all those who, despite human weaknesses and repeated falls, are striving to live according to the word of God; all those who are confused about the truth and are tempted to call evil good and darkness light; all those who are yearning for truth and grasping for hope.

I ask you to show yourself once again as a Mother with that deep human concern which was yours at Cana of Galilee. Helpall those weighed down by the problems of life. Console the suffering. Comfort the sad and dejected, those tormented in spirit, those without families, loved ones or friends.

Assistthe poor and those who need, and those subjected to discrimination or other forms of injustice. Come to the help of the unemployed. Heal the sick. Aid the handicapped and disabled, so that they may live in a manner befitting their dignity as children of God.Stir up the consciences of us all, to respond to the needs of others, with justice, mercy and love.

3. Through your intercession I askthat sinners may be reconciled, and that the whole Church in America become ever more attentive to Christ’s call to conversion and to holiness of life.

I pray that all those baptized in Christ your Son will be strengthened in the great cause of Christian unity, according to his will.

I ask your prayers sothat citizens may work together to conquer evil with good, oppose violence, reject war and its weapons, satisfy hunger, overcome hatred, and remedy all forms of personal, social, national and international injustice.

I ask youto strengthen the Catholic peoplein truth and love, in their obedience to the commandments of God, and in their fidelity of the sacraments.

Virgin Mother of God, Our Lady of the Angels: I entrust to youthe whole Church in America. Help her to excel in sacrifice and service. Purify her love, renew her life, and convert her constantly to the Gospel of your Son. Lead her children withall their Christian and non-Christian brethrento eternal life, for the glory of your Son Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with the Father in the unity of the Holy Spirit, for ever and ever. Amen.

© Copyright 1987 -  Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See