ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE PONTIFICAL NORTH AMERICAN COLLEGE IN ROME

Sunday, 22 February 1970

Dear Sons and Friends in Jesus Christ,

We have two brief considerations to present to you today. (For that matter, our presence among you wishes to convey a message as ample as a long discourse).

Of these two considerations, the first one is in your own language, as We rely on your indulgence for Our limited English; the second one is in Italian, which by now you have mastered. The first consideration is about your stay in the American College in Rome; the second one concerns the Gospel text which is assigned for this second Sunday in Lent.

Our first idea is suggested by the fact that you are all citizens of a great country, the United States of America, and now residing in this College in Rome. It is very appropriate to reflect on this fact today, the feast of Saint Peter’s Chair and the anniversary of the birth of George Washington (February 22, 1732).

Your being here in Rome is neither accidental nor unimportant. It is not pure coincidence. Already you must have meditated on it many times, with serious and profound reflection. It is something deliberately willed for your spiritual formation; for your preparation for a priestly ministry; for a service, yet to come, to the Church and to your fellow citizens. It is something very important from the pedagogical and ecclesial point of view.

What is the reason for this importance? We believe that it comes principally from the effects that your stay in Rome can have in your hearts. The factor of place is of great importance. To be in the center of a phenomenon which has a great sphere of influence in the world and in the life of men is always interesting (Take for example: a visit to a factory or to a school).

It is one thing to observe a phenomenon at its source and another thing to observe its peripheral effects. But if you realize what Rome means for a son of the Church and moreover for one of her ministers, then you will understand that your stay in Rome is a marvellous and enduring lesson. It is a lesson in history, in places, in art, in doctrine (and you are here precisely with the purpose to study).

Your stay in Rome is a lesson in that simple but complex organism, called the Roman Curia, which serves and directs the Church. It is that instrument needed by the Pope for the fulfilment of his mission. In all of this there is nothing new or secret for you; the heart physical and visible as it were, is surely very instructive and interesting.

But this is not all. Even a tourist, even a stranger can be interested in this particular aspect. But a member of the Church and especially a cleric sees something more on the Roman scene. He sees the evident traces, here in Rome, of those famous “marks” of the Catholic Church which reveal a wonderful design already showing forth the action of God. Here the unity and catholicity of the Church are seen more clearly than elsewhere; here the apostolic nature of the Church is evident in its marvellous and coherent tradition, and in the full exercise of those apostolic powers that come from Christ. Here the holiness of the Church shines forth in the number of her sons and daughters who witnessed by their life or by their death to the faith of Christ. Here there is seen the finality of her mission which is her reason for being: to save humanity by means of the word and the grace and the imitation of Christ.

We would like to say something more. Rome is not only a passive lesson, a silent book or a picture to be admired. Rome is a voice for him who knows how to listen. And for us it seems that the voice becomes a revelation and a “prophecy” on which our meditations will never be complete. This voice is the echo of the voice of Saint Paul which seems to acquire the supreme fullness of its meaning: “That you . . . may have power to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge” (Eph. 3: 18-19) in other words the infinite dimensions of the Kingdom of God. Here in Rome we have a special perspective to see better, through the visible signs of the historical and human reality of our Church, the interior reality of the new Covenant between God and humanity, effected in the charity of Christ the Savior.

You are sons of a great People, young and generous, and with the talent proper to your Nation, you are in an excellent position to perceive and discern this superior vision of God’s plan for the world, and thus to accept this Christian vocation to bring salvation and happiness to humanity.

La seconda parola sarà molto semplice, mentre dovrebbe essere molto lunga, profonda e mistica, perché riguarda la trasfigurazione di Gesu Cristo (the transfiguration of Jesus Christ); è la pagina del Vangelo che la Chiesa propone alla nostra meditazione nella liturgia di quest’oggi, seconda domenica di quaresima. Voi conoscete il racconto del fatto meraviglioso. Noi ci limitiamo ad un solo commento sulla conoscenza di Gesù. È una conoscenza che sembra facile, ed è invece misteriosa; una conoscenza che sembra immediata, ed è invece progressiva; una conoscenza che sembra offerta a tutti, ed è invece riservata, ad alcuni (Cfr.Marc. 9, 2;Matth. 11, 25;Matth. 13, 13); una conoscenza che sembra astrusa, ed invece diventa da se stessa luminosa, gaudiosa e amorosa (Cfr.Io. 14, 21); una conoscenza che sembra una come tante altre, e che invece diventa necessaria per spiegare tutte le altre (Io. 8, 12); una conoscenza che sembra indifferente per la nostra vita, ed invece è il principio della nostra vita vera ed eterna (Cfr.Io. 17, 3).

Ed è circa questa conoscenza che si svolge il Vangelo; è la chiave, che ne apre il segreto (Cfr.Io. 1, 10-11). Gesù è conosciuto dalla gente del suo ambiente come «il figlio del fabbro»: “Is not this the carpenter’s son?” (Matth. 13, 55).

Poi alcuni lo riconoscono come «figlio di David», “son of David” (Matth. 15, 22; 21, 9); altri come profeta, “This is the prophet Jesus from Nazareth of Galilee” (Matth. 21, 11); ed altri come il Precursore, Giovanni Battista redivivo, o come uno dei Profeti (Cfr.Marc. 6, 16;Matth. 16, 14); altri finalmente come «il Cristo, il Figlio del Dio vivente», “the Christ, the Son of the living God” (Matth. 16, 16); ed è a questo titolo, che Gesù è condannato a morte: “He deserves death” (Matth. 26, 66), ed in forza di questo titolo Gesù è risorto e vive per l’eternità (Cfr.Apoc. 5, 12).

Intorno all’enigma: chi sia Gesù, si svolge tutto il Vangelo, nell’incanto della sua semplicità e della sua bellezza, nel fascino della sua sapienza, nella drammaticità della sua tragedia, nel mistero della sua gloria finale. Qui, nella scena della trasfigurazione questo enigma è per un istante svelato; una rivelazione di luce e di gioia nella notte: «Questo è il mio Figlio diletto, lui ascoltate», dice la voce, che esce dalla nube misteriosa e luminosa: “This is my beloved Son; listen to him” (Marc. 9, 7).

Tutto è qui. Nella notte della storia la grande questione si pone continuamente; oggi più che mai: Chi è Gesù? La Chiesa, la Chiesa soltanto conosce e conserva la risposta vera e formidabile; Gesù, il figlio di Maria, è il Verbo incarnato, è il Figlio di Dio fatto uomo, è il Cristo, nostro fratello, nostro maestro, nostro Salvatore, nostro Signore.

E voi, carissimi Alunni di questo collegio, siete qui per ascoltare, per studiare, per meditare, per fare vostra oggi e per annunciare domani questa risposta della trasfigurazione, la risposta della verità, la risposta della fede, la risposta della luce e della salvezza del mondo. Non dimenticatelo mai!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See