ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVITO PARTICIPANTS IN THE MEETING PROMOTEDBY THE PONTIFICAL COUNCIL FOR JUSTICE AND PEACEON THE 50th ANNIVERSARYOF THE ENCYCLICAL "MATER ET MAGISTRA"

Clementine HallMonday, 16 May 2011

Your Eminences,Venerable Brothers in the Episcopate and in the Priesthood,Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,

I am glad to welcome you and to greet you on the occasion of the 50th anniversary ofBl. John XXIII’s EncyclicalMater et Magistra, a document that is still very timely even in this globalized world.

I greet the Cardinal President, whom I thank for his courteous words, as well as the Secretary, the collaborators of the Dicastery and all of you who have gathered here from all the continents for this important congress.

InMater et MagistraPope Roncalli, with his vision of a Church placed at the service of the human family especially through her specific mission of evangelization, conceived of social doctrine — anticipatingBl. John Paul II— as anessential elementof this mission, because it is “an integral part of the Christian conception of life” (n. 222).John XXIIIis at the origin of the affirmations of his Successors even when he pointed out in the Church thecommunitarianandpluralsubject of social doctrine.

TheChristifideleslaity, in particular, cannot be solely passive beneficiaries but are the protagonists of the Church’s social doctrine at the vital moment of its implementation. They are also valuable collaborators of the pastors in its formulation, thanks to the experience they have acquired in the field and to their own specific skills. ForBl. John XXIIIthis was particularly true of the Church’s social doctrine, of whichTruthis its light,Justiceits objective, andLoveits driving force (n. 226).

I took up his vision of social doctrine in the EncyclicalCaritas in Veritate,as a testimony of that continuity which keeps together the wholecorpusof the social Encyclicals. Truth, love and justice, indicated inMater et Magistra, along with the principle of the universal destination of resources as the fundamental criteria for overcoming social and culturalimbalances, continue to be the pillars on which to base the interpretation and also the search for a solution to the internalimbalancesof today’s globalization.

In the face of these imbalances it is necessary to re-establish anintegral reasonthat regenerates thinking and ethics. Without moral thought capable of overcoming the structure of secular ethics, such as the neo-utilarian and neo-contractual, that are based mainly on skepticism and on a prevalently immanentistic view of history, access to knowledge of thetrue human goodbecomes difficult for contemporary man.

It is necessary to develophumanistic cultural synthesesopen to the Transcendent through anew evangelization— rooted in the new law of the Gospel, the law of the Spirit — towards which Bl. John Paul ii frequently urged us.

Only in personal communion with the New Adam, Jesus Christ, is human reason healed and empowered and it becomes possible to gain a broader vision of development, of the economy and of politics, in accordance with their anthropological dimension and the new historical conditions.

It is thanks to reason, whosespeculativeandpracticalcapacity has been restored, that it is possible to avail oneself of the basic criteria in order to overcome global imbalances in the light of the common good. In fact, without knowledge of thetrue human good, charity lapses into sentimentalism (cf. n. 3); justice loses its fundamental “measure”, the principle of the universal destination of resources is delegitimized.

Disparity, the gap between the rich and the poorandinequalitiesare nourished by the various global imbalances that characterize our epoch. They create problems of justice and hamper the fair distribution of resources and opportunities, especially with regard to the poorest.

However, no less worrying are the phenomenon linked to a financial system which, after the most acute phase of the crisis, has returned to the frenzied practice of drawing up credit contracts that often allow unlimited speculation. The phenomena of harmful speculation occur also in regard to staple foodstuffs, water and land, ultimately further impoverishing those already living in borderline situations.

Likewise, the increase in the prices of basic energy resources, with the consequent search for alternative forms of energy prompted, on occasion, by exclusively short-term financial interests, which can result in a negative impact on the environment, as well as on man himself.

The social question today is without a doubt one ofworld social justiceas, moreover,Mater et Magistraalready mentioned 50 years ago, although with reference to a different context. Furthermore, it is a question of the justdistributionof material and non-material resources, of theglobalizationofsubstantive socialandparticipatory democracy. For this reason, in a context in which a gradual unification of humanity is taking place, it is indispensable that thenew evangelization of societyhighlight the implications of a justice that should be achieved at a universal level.

With reference to thefoundationof this justice it should be emphasized that it is impossible to achieve it through social consensus alone, without recognizing that, to be permanent, it must be rooted in theuniversal good of humanity. With regard to the plan ofrealization, social justice should be practised in civil society, in the market economy (cf.Caritas in Veritate, n. 35), but also by a proportionately honest and transparent political authority, also at the international level (cf. ibid., n. 67).

With regard to the great challenges of our day, while the Church trusts primarily in the Lord Jesus and in his Sprit, who lead her through the events of the world, for the spread of the social doctrine she also relies on the activity of her cultural institutions, her programmes for religious instruction and social catechesis in the parishes, on the mass media and on the proclamation and witness of theChristifideles laici(cf.Mater et Magistra, nn. 207-208).

The latter must bespiritually,professionallyandethicallyprepared.Mater et Magistrainsisted not only on formation but also on theeducationthat forms a Christian conscience and introduces the person to concrete action in accordance with wisely guideddiscernment.

Bl. John XXIII said that “Christian education... must... aim at... fostering among the faithful... their duty to carry on the economic and social activities in a Christian manner (n. 228). Consequently, to be successful, formal instruction must be supplemental by... active cooperation in their own training” (n. 231) put into practice.

Still valid, too, in addition, are the instructions that Pope Roncalli offered on a legitimate pluralism among Catholics in the implementation of the social doctrine. He wrote, in fact, that in this context “differences of opinion in the application of principles can sometimes arise even among sincere Catholics. When this happens, they should be careful not to lose their respect and esteem for each other. Instead, they should strive to find points of agreement for effective and quick action, and not wear themselves out in interminable arguments, and, under pretext of the better or the best, omit to do the good that is possible and therefore obligatory” (n. 238).

Importantinstitutionsat the service of the new evangelization of the social fabric, besides volunteer organizations and Christian non-governmental organizations or those inspired by Christian ideals, are theCommissions “Justice and Peace”, theOffices for Social and Labour Problems, theCentresandInstitutes of social doctrine, many of which do not confine themselves to its study and spread, but also accompany various initiatives that experiment with the content of the social Magisterium, as is the case with social cooperatives for development, experiences of micro-credit and an economy inspired by the logic of communion and fraternity.

InMater et MagistraBl. John XXIII recalled that one can better understand the basic demands of justice when one “walks a ‘child of the light’” (cf. 257). Therefore, my wish for you is that the Risen Lord may warm your hearts and help you to spread the fruit of redemption through a new evangelization of the social sphere and the witness of arighteous lifeaccording to the Gospel. May this evangelization be supported by a proper social apostolate, systematically put into effect in the various particular Churches. In a world that is frequently self-centred, without hope, the Church expects you to be leaven, tireless sowers ofgenuine and responsible thought andgenerous social planning, sustained by a total love of the truth that abides in Jesus Christ, the Word of God made man. In thanking you for your work, I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See