ADDRESS OF PAUL VITO THE PRIME MINISTER OF GREAT BRITAIN,H.E. Mr. HAROLD WILSON

Wednesady, April 28, 1965

Honourable Sir,

We are very happy to welcome you into Our home this evening because your visit provides Us with the precious occasion of sending heartfelt greetings to the noble nation of Great Britain through its Prime Minister.

We assure you that We follow with interest the developments in your country, and We know that for years Great Britain has given example of representative and democratic government. The religious spirit is not alien to political life and Christian traditions continue to play an important role in public life. Changes have occurred in your country but these have been peaceful evolutions through democratic processes so much a part of your national tradition. Violent revolution has been absent from the political life of your nation.

Peace, for which the world longs, seems to be threatened again, and We are pleased to observe that Great Britain has given support and assistance to international organizations without which harmonious collaboration of nations is certainly difficult and without which the necessary mutual respect among nations would not be possible. We recall Our plea for peace launched last December in Bombay. We asked nations to discard their arms and to pledge their cost to the peaceful development of the poor developing nations of the world. We are confident that We find in Great Britain a sympathetic response to this plea.

Our children in your country are for Us a source of much consolation and happiness because We see in them loyal and dedicated citizens striving to make their contribution to the common good of their land. The Government of Great Britain has given valuable and generous assistance in the field of education, thus guaranteeing a rich heritage of learning. We are grateful for this and We know that this aid will not be lacking in future years. Education holds great promise for the future of a nation.

Through you then, Honourable Sir, We send Our most heartfelt greetings to Her Majesty the Queen and to her family, to the members of the Government, and to all the citizens of your grand nation. We invoke upon Great Britain the rich blessings of God; may it long prosper in peace and happiness:

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See