MESSAGE OF THE HOLY FATHER LEO XIVON THE PASSING OF HIS HOLINESS AND BEATITUDE ILIA II,CATHOLICOS-PATRIARCH OF ALL GEORGIA, ARCHBISHOP OF MTSKHETA-TBILISI AND METROPOLITAN OF ABKHAZIA AND BICHVINTA

[Multimedia]

_________________

To His Eminence ShioMetropolitan of Senaki and ChkhorotskuLocum Tenens of the Patriarchal SeeHoly Synod of the Orthodox Church of Georgia

It is with deep sadness that I learned of the death of His Holiness and Beatitude Ilia II, Catholicos-Patriarch of All Georgia. In sending my heartfelt condolences I assure Your Eminence, the Holy Synod, and the entire Orthodox Church of Georgia of my fraternal solidarity in your grief. At this delicate moment for your people, I join you in prayer and in your grateful remembrance of the Shepherd and Father who guided you with kindness, wisdom and evangelical strength for so many years.

Throughout his long life, Patriarch Ilia II was a devoted witness to faith in the Risen Christ. His ministry accompanied the Georgian people through difficult times and profound epochal change, lovingly preserving tradition and opening hearts and communities to hope.

I would also recall his deep passion for music, which is a stimulus to the search for the beauty of God and can unite peoples, bringing Churches closer together beyond cultural and theological differences.

For many, he was a spiritual father, a voice of reconciliation and a tireless builder of unity. He met with two of my esteemed predecessors —Saint John Paul IIandPope Francis— always in a spirit of cordiality and fraternity.

As you entrust this faithful servant to the Lord, the words of the Apostle Paul resound powerfully, reminding us that the resurrection of Jesus is the foundation of our faith and the source of our hope. For if Christ has not been raised, then our faith is in vain (cf.1 Cor15:14). Faced with the death of a Shepherd, therefore, our hearts do not yield to despair. Instead, they are opened to the certainty that life is not taken away but transformed.

With these sentiments, I express to Your Eminence my fraternal closeness as you bear the weight of the ministry ofLocum Tenens. I pray that the Lord will grant you light, discernment and fortitude, so that you may accompany the Orthodox Church of Georgia with that same pastoral charity which animated the late Patriarch. I ask the Most Holy Mother of God to protect Your Eminence, the Holy Synod, and the entire Georgian people with her mantle of consolation and love.

From the Vatican, 18 March 2026

LEO PP. XIV

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See