ADDRESS OF HOLY FATHER FRANCISTO PARTICIPANTS IN THE CLOSING SESSION OF THE DIOCESAN PHASEOF THE PROCESS OF BEATIFICATION OF THE SERVANT OF GODCARDINAL FRANÇOIS XAVIER NGUYEN VAN THUAN

Clementine HallSaturday, 6 July2013

Video

Venerable Brothers, Dear Brothers and Sisters,

I am glad to meet you and I offer you my cordial welcome. I greet with affection Cardinal Peter Turkson and thank him for his words. I greet Cardinal Law, and I greet all of you who have come from so many parts of the world for the closing of the diocesan phase of the cause of the Servant of God Cardinal Francesco Saverio Nguyên Van Thuân.

Dear friends, your joy is my joy too! Let us give thanks to God!

And let us also thank all those who are involved in this service which is for the glory of God and his kingdom; the Postulator of the cause, Dr Waldery Hilgeman and his collaborators, the Diocesan Tribunal and the competent Office of the Vicariate, the Historical Commission and the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace itself, where the memory of Cardinal Van Thuân, a witness of hope, is ever alive and is more than a memory; it is a spiritual presence that continues to bring his blessing.

Indeed there are many people who can witness to having been edified by meeting the Servant of God Francesco Saverio Nguyên Van Thuân, in the various stages of his life. The experience shows that the fame of his holiness spread through the testimony passed on by the large number of people who met him and who treasure in their heart his gentle smile and his great mind.

Many also became acquainted with him through his writings, simple and profound, that reveal his priestly mind, deeply united with the One who called him to be a minister of his mercy and love.

So many people have written, recounting graces and signs attributed to the intercession of the Servant of God Cardinal Van Thuân. Let us thank the Lord for this venerable Brother, a son of the East who ended his earthly pilgrimage in the service of the Successor of St Peter.

Let us entrust to the intercession of the Virgin Mary the progress of this cause, as well as of all the others that are currently under way. May Our Lady help us to live ever better in our life the beauty and joy of communion with Christ.

To you all and to your loved ones I warmly impart my blessing. Many thanks.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See