APOSTOLIC LETTERIN THE FORM OF A “MOTU PROPRIO” OFBENEDICT XVIFOR THE PREVENTION AND COUNTERINGOF ILLEGAL ACTIVITIESIN THE AREA OF MONETARY AND FINANCIAL DEALINGS

The Apostolic See has always raised its voice to urge all people of good will, and especially the leaders of nations, to commit themselves through a just and lasting peace in every part of the world to the building of the universal city of God which is the goal of the history of the community of peoples and of nations [Benedict XVI, Encyclical LetterCaritas in Veritate,(29 June 2009), n. 7].

Unfortunately in our time, in an ever more globalized society, peace is threatened by various causes, including the improper use of the market and of the economy, and the dreadful and destructive violence that terrorism perpetrates, causing death, suffering, hatred and social instability.

Most appropriately the international community is increasingly equipping itself with the juridical principles and instruments that enable it to prevent and to counter the phenomena of laundering of money and the financing of terrorism.

The Holy See approves this commitment and intends to adopt these laws as its own in the utilization of the material resources that serve to carry out the mission and duties of Vatican City State.

In this framework and in implementation of the Monetary Convention between Vatican City State and the European Union of 17 December 2009, for the said State I have approved:

the promulgation of theLaw concerning the prevention and countering of the laundering of proceeds from criminal activities and of the financing of terrorismof 30 December 2010, which comes into force today.

With this Apostolic Letter in the form of a “Motu Proprio”:

a) I  establish  that  the above-mentioned Law of Vatican City State and its future modifications apply as well to the Dicasteries of the Roman Curia and for each and every dependent institution or entity in which they carry out their activities, in accordance with Art. 2 of the same Law;

b) I establish the Autorità di Informazione Finanziaria (AIF) indicated in Art. 33 of theLaw concerning the prevention and countering of the proceeds from criminal activities and of the financing of terrorism,as an Institution connected with the Holy See in accordance withArticles 186 and 190-191 of the Apostolic ConstitutionPastor Bonus,conferring upon it a public canonical juridical personality and a Vatican civil personality and approving its Statutes, which are attached to this“Motu Proprio”;

c) I establish that the Autorità di Informazione Finanziaria (AIF) exercise its duties with respect to the Dicasteries of the Roman Curia and of all the entities and institutions as specified in paragraph a).

d) I delegate, in the case of the crimes specified by the above-mentioned Law, the competent judicial Authorities of Vatican City State to exercise penal jurisdiction in regard to the institutions mentioned in paragraph a),

I stipulate that what has been established have full and permanent value from this day forth, anything to the contrary notwithstanding, although it may deserve special mention.

I establish that this Apostolic Letter in the form of a “Motu Proprio” be published in theActa Apostolicae Sedis.

Given in Rome, at the Apostolic Palace, on 30 December in the Year 2010, the sixth of the Pontificate.

BENEDICTUS PP. XVI

© Copyright 2010 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See