JUBILEE PILGRIMAGEOF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IITO THE HOLY LAND (MARCH 20-26, 2000)

VISIT TO WADI AL-KHARRARPRAYER OF THE HOLY FATHER

Tuesday, 21 March 2000

I want to greet all of you for having gathered for this brief prayer. In particular, I pray for His Majesty the King and I thank him again for the welcome I have received in Jordan.

In the Gospel of Saint Luke we read that “the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the wilderness; and he went into all the region about the Jordan, preaching a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins” (3:2-3). Here, at the River Jordan, where both banks are visited by hosts of pilgrims honouring the Baptism of the Lord, I too lift up my heart in prayer:

Glory to you, O Father, God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob!

You sent your servants the Prophetsto speak your word of faithful loveand call your people to repentance.

On the banks of the River Jordan,you raised up John the Baptist,a voice crying in the wilderness,sent through all the region of the Jordanto prepare the way of the Lord,to herald the coming of Jesus.

Glory to you, O Christ, Son of God!To the waters of the Jordan you cameto be baptized by the hand of John.

Upon you the Spirit descended as a dove.

Above you the heavens opened,and the voice of the Father was heard:“This is my Son, the Beloved!”

From the river blessed by your presenceyou went forth to baptize not only with waterbut with fire and the Holy Spirit.

Glory to you, O Holy Spirit, Lord and Giver of life!

By your power, the Church is baptized,going down with Christ into deathand rising with him to new life.

By your power, we are set free from sinto become the children of God,the glorious Body of Christ.

By your power, all fear is vanquished,and the Gospel of love is preachedin every corner of the earth,to the glory of God,the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit,to whom be all praise in this Jubilee yearand in every age to come. Amen.

I wish to thank everyone who has taken part and all who helped in the organization.

A special word of thanks goes to the Patriarchs and Bishops, the priests, the Sisters. It has been a moving experience to celebrate with the Catholic Community of Jordan.

And I cordially greet the representatives of other communities who have come from many other parts of the Middle East. I am grateful to you all.

I feel especially close to the children and young people. Know that the Church and the Pope put great trust in you!

Special greetings to His Royal Highness Prince Mohammed.

I will keep all the people of Jordan - Christians and Muslims - in my prayers, especially the sick and the elderly.

With gratitude I invoke abundant blessings upon His Highness the King and upon the whole nation.

God bless you all! God bless Jordan!

May Saint John Baptist protect Islam and all the people of Jordan, and all who partecipated in this celebration, a memorable celebration. I’m very grateful to all of you.

Thank you very much.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See