ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIVTO PARTICIPANTS IN THE COURSE FORDIOCESAN LITURGICAL PASTORAL WORKERSPROMOTED BY THE PONTIFICAL LITURGICAL INSTITUTE “SAINT ANSELM”

Consistory HallMonday, 17 November 2025

[Multimedia]

__________________

In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.Peace be with you!

Good morning, and welcome to you all!

I greet the Abbot Primate, the Rector of the Athenaeum of Saint Anselm, the dean of the Pontifical Liturgical Institute, and all the participants in the refresher course for diocesan liturgical pastoral workers. I am pleased to welcome you at the beginning of your course of in-depth study.

The formative proposal in which you are participating corresponds to the twofold mission of the Pontifical Liturgical Institute. As the Holy FatherBenedict XVIhoped, it continues its service to the Church with enthusiasm, in full fidelity to the liturgical tradition and to the reform desired by theSecond Vatican Council, according to the guidelines ofSacrosanctumConciliumand the pronouncements of the Magisterium (cf.Address to participants in the conference promoted by the Pontifical University of Saint Anselm, 6 May 2011). On the other hand, initiatives such as this serve to implement the formative missions set out in the Apostolic ConstitutionVeritatisgaudium, such as the formation of ministers and the faithful to prepare them for their service in pastoral care and liturgy.

It seems to me thatPope Francis' warm invitation is also addressed to your Institute. In his Apostolic LetterDesiderio desideravi, he recommended: “It is necessary to find the channels for a formation that is the study of Liturgy. From the beginning of the liturgical movement, much has been done in this regard, with precious contributions from scholars and academic institutions. Nonetheless, it is important now to spread this knowledge beyond the academic environment, in an accessible way, so that each one of the faithful might grow in a knowledge of the theological sense of the Liturgy [and of] the very celebration itself” (no. 35).

Indeed, in the dioceses and parishes there is a need for such formation and it is important, when it is not present, to initiate biblical and liturgical courses. The Pontifical Liturgical Institute could qualify them to help particular Churches and parish communities to be formed by the Word of God, explaining the texts of the weekday and feast day Lectionary, and also to continue a Christian and liturgical initiation that helps the faithful to understand, through rites, prayers and visible signs, the mystery of faith that is celebrated (cf.SacrosanctumConcilium, 48).

With regard to biblical formation combined with liturgical formation, I recommend that directors of liturgical pastoral offices pay particular attention to those who proclaim the Word of God. Ensure that instituted lectors and those who regularly read the Scriptures at celebrations are thoroughly prepared. Basic biblical knowledge, clear diction, the ability to sing the responsorial psalm, as well as to compose prayers of the faithful for the community are important aspects that implement liturgical reform and help the People of God grow on their path.

We are well aware that liturgical formation is one of the main themes of the entire conciliar and post-conciliar journey. Much progress has been made, but there is still a long way to go. Let us not tire: let us enthusiastically resume the good initiatives inspired by the reform and, at the same time, seek new ways and new methods.

The office for liturgical ministry is responsible in each diocese for the ongoing liturgical formation of the clergy and the faithful, for preparation for ministries, and for the care of parish liturgical groups, altar servers, lectors, and cantors. The aim is to foster the fruitful participation of the People of God, as well as a dignified liturgy that is attentive to different sensibilities and sober in its solemnity.

Among the aspects linked to your service as directors, I would like to mention the promotion of the Liturgy of the Hours, care for popular piety, and attention to the celebratory dimension in the construction of new churches and the adaptation of existing ones. These are topics that you will address during the course and which you confront every day.

In many parishes, then, there are also liturgical groups who must work in synergy with the diocesan commission. The experience of a group, even small but well motivated, that is concerned with the preparation of the liturgy is an expression of a community that cares for its celebrations, prepares them, and lives them to the full, in agreement with the parish priest. In this way, we avoid delegating everything to him and leaving only a few people responsible for singing, proclaiming the Word, and decorating the church. Over time, unfortunately, some of these groups have dwindled to the point of disappearing, as if they had lost their identity; it is therefore necessary to work to make this area of Church life attractive again, capable of involving people who are competent or at least inclined to this type of service.

As directors appointed by the bishops, you could offer your fellow parish priests formation courses to start or consolidate liturgical groups in the parish, training their members and offering suggestions for their activities. The workshops of the course will help you in this regard to find and experiment with appropriate forms that you can introduce in your particular Churches. Your pastoral creativity will then find the most suitable forms.

Dear friends, as you begin this formative journey, I hope that the phase in Rome, in theJubilee Year, as well as offering you tools for deeper understanding, will reinvigorate your spiritual energies, so that, returning to the local Churches, you may continue your pastoral action in the service of the liturgy with renewed impetus. And this is my hope, as I bless you from my heart. Thank you.

_____________________________

Holy See Press Office Bulletin, 17 November 2025

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See