URBI ET ORBI MESSAGEOF HIS HOLINESS POPE JOHN PAUL IIEaster Sunday, 31 March 2002

URBI ET ORBI MESSAGEOF HIS HOLINESS POPE JOHN PAUL II

Easter Sunday, 31 March 2002

1. "Venit Jesus... et dixit eis: ‘Pax vobis!’""Jesus came... and said to them, "Peace be with you" (Jn20:19).Christ’s blessing resounds today,on this most solemn day: Peace be with you!Peace to all the men and women of the world!Christ is trulyrisen,and bringspeaceto all!This is the "good news" of Easter.Today is the new day, "made by the Lord" (Ps117:24),which, in the glorious body of the Risen One,restores to the world, wounded by sin,its original beauty,radiant with new splendour.

2. "Death with life contended;combat strangely ended!"After the terrible battle Christ returns victoriousand advances upon the stage of historyannouncing the Good News:"I am the resurrection and the life" (Jn11:25),"I am the light of the world" (Jn9:5).His message can be summarized in one word:"Pax vobis– Peace be with you!"His peace is thefruit of the victoryover sin and deathwhich he gained at a high price.

3. "I leave you peace, I give you my peace.Not as the world gives itdo I give it to you" (Jn14:27).Peace "in the manner of the world"– the experience of every age shows it –is often a precarious balance of powers,that sooner or later turn against one another once more.The peace which is the gift of the Risen Christis deep and complete, and can reconcile manwith God, with himself and with creation.Many religions proclaimthat peace is a gift from God.We saw this againat the recent Meeting at Assisi.May all the world’s believersjoin their efforts to builda more just and fraternal humanity;may they work tirelesslyto ensure that religious convictions may never bethe cause of division and hatred, but only and alwaysa source of brotherhood, harmony, love.

4. Christian communities on every continent,with trepidation and hope I ask youto proclaim that Jesus is truly risen,and to work so that his peacemay bring an end to the tragic sequence of atrocities and killingsthat bloody the Holy Land,plunged again in these very daysinto horror and despair.It seems that war has been declared on peace!But nothing is resolved by war,it only brings greater suffering and death,nothing is resolved through reprisal and retaliation.This is a truly great tragedy:no one can remain silent and inactive,no political or religious leader!Denunciation must be followed by practical acts of solidaritythat will help everyone to rediscover mutual respectand return to frank negotiation.In that Land Christ died and rose from the dead,and left the empty tombas a silent but eloquent attestation.By breaking down in himself the hostilitythe dividing wall between people,he has reconciled all through the Cross (cf.Eph2:14-16),and now he commits us, his disciples,to remove every reason for hatred and revenge.

5. How many members of the human familyare still subject to misery and violence!In how many corners of the world do we hear the cryof those who implore help, because they are suffering and dying:from Afghanistan, terribly afflicted in recent monthsand now stricken by a disastrous earthquake,to so many other countries of the worldwhere social imbalances and rival ambitions still tormentcountless numbers of our brothers and sisters.Men and women of the third millennium!Let me repeat to you:open your hearts to Christ, crucified and risen,who comes with the offer of peace!Wherever the Risen Christ enters,he brings with him true peace!May that peace enter, first of all, every human heart,the unsoundable depth, not easy to heal (cf.Jer17:9).May it permeate relations between all sectors of society,between different peoples, tongues and mentalities,bringing everywhere the leaven of solidarity and love.

6. And you, Risen Lord,who have overcome tribulation and death,grant us your peace!We know that peacewill be fully revealed at the end of time,when you come in glory.Nevertheless, wherever you are presentpeace isalreadyat work in the world.This is our conviction,founded on you, who today have risen from the dead,the Lamb sacrificed for our salvation!You ask us to keep alive in the worldthe flame of hope.On this radiant day,the Church sings with faith and joy:"Christ, my hope, has risen!"Yes, Christ is risen, and with himhas risen our hope!Alleluia!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See