URBI ET ORBI MESSAGEOF HIS HOLINESS POPE JOHN PAUL IICHRISTMAS 2003

CHRISTMAS 2003

1.Descendit de caelis Salvator mundi. Gaudeamus!

The Saviour of the world has come down from heaven. Let us rejoice!This proclamation, filled with deep rejoicing,echoed in the night of Bethlehem.Today the Church renews it with unchanged joy:the Saviour is born for us!A wave of tenderness and hope fills our hearts,together with an overpowering need for closeness and peace.In the crib we contemplate the Onewho stripped himself of divine gloryin order to become poor,driven by love for mankind.Beside the crib the Christmas tree,with its twinkling lights,reminds us that with the birth of Jesusthe tree of life has blossomed anew in the desert of humanity.Thecriband thetree: precious symbols,which hand down in time the true meaning of Christmas!

2. In the heavens there echoes the proclamation of the angels:"To you is born in the city of Davida Saviour, who is Christ the Lord"(Lk 2:11).What wonder!By being born in Bethlehem, the Eternal Son of Godhas entered into the history of each personliving on the face of the earth.He is now present in the worldas the one Saviour of humanityFor this reason we pray to him:Saviour of the world, save us!

3. Save us from the great evils which rend humanityin these first years of the third millennium.Save us from the wars and armed conflictswhich lay waste whole areas of the world,from the scourge of terrorismand from the many forms of violencewhich assail the weak and the vulnerable.Save us from discouragementas we face the paths to peace,difficult paths indeed, yet possible and therefore necessary;paths which are always and everywhere urgent,especially in the Land where You were born,the Prince of Peace.

4. And you, Mary,the Virgin of expectation and fulfilment,who hold the secret of Christmas,make us able to recognize in the Childwhom you hold in your arms the heralded Saviour,who brings hope and peace to all.With you we worship him and trustingly say:we need You, Redeemer of man,You who know the hopes and fears of our hearts.Come and stay with us, Lord!May the joy of your Nativity reachto the farthest ends of the universe!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See