APOSTOLIC JOURNEY OF POPE BENEDICT XVITO PORTUGAL ON THE OCCASION OF THE TENTH ANNIVERSARYOF THE BEATIFICATION OF JACINTA AND FRANCISCO,YOUNG SHEPHERDS OF FÁTIMA

ACT OF ENTRUSTMENT AND CONSECRATIONOF PRIESTS TO THE IMMACULATE HEART OF MARY

PRAYER OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVI

Church of the Most Holy Trinity - FátimaWednesday, 12 May 2010

Immaculate Mother,in this place of grace,called together by the love of your Son Jesusthe Eternal High Priest, we,sons in the Son and his priests,consecrate ourselves to your maternal Heart,in order to carry out faithfully the Father’s Will.

We are mindful that, without Jesus,we can do nothing good (cf.Jn15:5)and that only through him, with him and in him,will we be instruments of salvationfor the world.

Bride of the Holy Spirit,obtain for us the inestimable giftof transformation in Christ.Through the same power of the Spirit thatovershadowed you,making you the Mother of the Saviour,help us to bring Christ your Sonto birth in ourselves too.May the Churchbe thus renewed by priests who are holy,priests transfigured by the grace of himwho makes all things new.

Mother of Mercy,it was your Son Jesus who called usto become like him:light of the world and salt of the earth(cf.Mt5:13-14).

Help us,through your powerful intercession,never to fall short of this sublime vocation,nor to give way to our selfishness,to the allurements of the worldand to the wiles of the Evil One.

Preserve us with your purity,guard us with your humilityand enfold us with your maternal lovethat is reflected in so many soulsconsecrated to you,who have become for ustrue spiritual mothers.

Mother of the Church,we priests want to be pastorswho do not feed themselvesbut rather give themselves to God for their brethren,finding their happiness in this.Not only with words, but with our lives,we want to repeat humbly,day after day,Our “here I am”.

Guided by you,we want to be Apostlesof Divine Mercy,glad to celebrate every daythe Holy Sacrifice of the Altarand to offer to those who request itthe sacrament of Reconciliation.

Advocate and Mediatrix of grace,you who are fully immersedin the one universal mediation of Christ,invoke upon us, from God,a heart completely renewedthat loves God with all its strengthand serves mankind as you did.

Repeat to the Lordyour efficacious word:“They have no wine” (Jn2:3),so that the Father and the Son will send upon usa new outpouring ofthe Holy Spirit.Full of wonder and gratitudeat your continuing presence in our midst,in the name of all priestsI too want to cry out:“Why is this granted me,that the mother of my Lord should come to me?” (Lk1:43).

Our Mother for all time,do not tire of “visiting us”,consoling us, sustaining us.Come to our aidand deliver us from every dangerthat threatens us.With this act of entrustment and consecration,we wish to welcome youmore deeply, more radically,for ever and totallyinto our human and priestly lives.

Let your presence cause new blooms to burst forthin the desert of our loneliness,let it cause the sun to shine on our darkness,let it restore calm after the tempest,so that all mankind shall see the salvationof the Lord,who has the name and the face of Jesus,who is reflected in our hearts,for ever united to yours!

Amen!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See