ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE FIRST AMBASSADOR OF AUSTRALIATO THE HOLY SEE*

Monday, 8 October 1973

Mr Ambassador,

It is with great pleasure that we welcome Your Excellency and receive the Letters accrediting you as the first Ambassador of Australia to the Holy See.

The establishment of diplomatic relations between your country and the Holy See is a source of satisfaction to us. A new and important channel of communication is opened up on matters of common interest both within and beyond your frontiers. These official links reflect the shared conviction that men must work together in the spiritual as well as in the political and economic order if justice, peace and genuine progress are to he achieved.

Your Excellency pointed out that in recent years Australia has increased the number of her diplomatic relations with other States. We cannot but welcome this as a manifestation of your country’s desire to contribute towards greater understanding among all men. The Holy See for its part is fully conscious of the role it is increasingly called upon to fulfil in matters touching the spiritual interests of mankind and especially the promotion of peace at all levels. It is only by strengthening understanding and cooperation that we can hope to achieve this common task successfully.

This moment recalls to our mind very pleasant memories of the visit which we paid to your country in 1970. We remember with profound gratitude the warm welcome which was then extended tous. May we ask you, Mr Ambassador, to convey to the civil authorities of Australia the expression of our cordial esteem. Be assured that we invoke God’s abundant blessings upon the beloved Australian people.

To Your Excellency we extend our heartfelt good wishes for the successful accomplishment of your mission.

*AAS65 (1973), p.554-555.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. XI, p.949-950.

L’Attività della Santa Sede 1973, p.346-347.

ORa n.43 p.2.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See