RADIO MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS PIUSXIITO THE PARTICIPANTSIN THE 2nd NATIONAL EUCHARISTIC CONGRESSOF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS*Sunday, 2 December 1956

Two years almost to the day have passed, Venerable Brethren and dear children of the Philippine Republic, since last We shared with you, oven the air-waves, the delights of a family reunion at your lovely Island home in the South Pacific. During these intervening months, laden with all their alternating human anguish, laborious reconstruction and even heroic resistance to the powers of darkness, the Lord's community of peoples has hoped and endured much in every continent, your own not least among the courageous contenders for a Christian peace.

What solace, then, it brings to the heart of the Vicar of Christ, at another critical moment in the history of salvation, to find you united again to-night around the altar of the Most High, «lowly bowed in adoration» before the uplifted Host (Tantum ergo Sacramentum)! As your second National Eucharistic Congress draws to its end, once more you have transformed yourLuneta, as it were, into one vast living ostensorium, and Manila Bay resounds with the perrenial supplication of Mother Church to her divine Founder and Sustainer : « O Victim, Who hast saved us, and reopened Heaven's gate, the struggle still is fierce: beThouour strength, Thine aid bestow! » (O salutaris Hostia).

Surely nothing but an alert Christian instinct, kindled and fortified through these four hundred years of your Catholic witness and combat in the East, could have led you to entrust this year your precious contribution to the Church's prayer and planning « for a better world » to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. These days of prayerful study and discussion, guided by Our dear Son, the Cardinal Legate, and graced by the presence of so many of your civil and religious leaders, cannot fail to point the lesson, for all to heed, that you are the members of alivingChrist, and not merely the jealous guardians of a pious Christian memory or tradition; that the better world, for which the nations are yearning, will be born and nourished of His sanctifying and healing grace, or it will not come to birth at all; that victory for divine and human values in the global struggle for men's souls is assured to these alone who are loyal to His cause and obedient to His commands.

Better far than words or song, your Christian deeds will show your trust in His Eucharistic Presence. He is the sacramental bond of your Filipino unity. Within the sanctuary of your homes, in the hearts of your boys and girls, in the private and public institutions of your country, He must be counted the silent but ardent Associate of your work and your worship, as yon have so nobly acknowledged this week by a triple consecration to His Sacred Heart. His is the abiding Spirit that would animate your schools and athenaeums and universities, your missions for the afflicted, your Catholic Action, your institutes of social order.

Who then will complain that the burden of your Congress resolutions is too heavy, the ideal too high for a frail, isolated people to achieve? You are not frail as long as He sustains you. Spurn this all too seductive myth of isolation, while all the infinite resources of His body and blood, soul and divinity, are yours for the asking!Trust in His Eucharistic power, and see that it is made daily more abundantly available by the generous gift of your sons to the priesthood and religious life. Put ye on Christ (Cf. Eph. 6: 11), and so do battle, not onlyforHim, but through Him, with Him and in Him (Canon of the Mass) against the forces of sensuality and godless materialism threatening today so much that your nation holds priceless in its heritage. Possessed of the divine Fire He carne to stir and spread, what child of His could dare be neutral, or yield to the lure of a selfish, narrow nationalism, while the very conscience of mankind is being assaulted and defiled? The enemy of all that is called God does not disarm; but neither does He! In the inevitable hour of trial and temptation, let His Blessed Sacrament, devoutly and frequently received, make you strong with the strength of the Lord God of hosts!

Such reliance on the invincible power of Christ in your hearts and homes cannot but confirm yourtrust in His Eucharistic promises. Has He not richly rewarded already His faithful followers among you, during these last decades of spiritual and material ruin, mingled with its measure of triumphant sanctity? Amid so much evidence of your restored national vitality in the political, social and economic realms, must We not see one more prodigious sign of Our Lord's eternal fidelity to His own (Cf. Ps. 116: 2) in your twenty-two new seminaries, rising, thanks to the tenacious devotion and sacrifice of your Episcopate and laity, above the devastation of a cruel war?

Close by this throbbing harbour of your Capital City, finally, Our Cardinal Legate is to bless to-morrow evening the corner-stone of one more Repository for your nation's prayer and toil, its joy and pain of the coming years, dedicated to the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Let a trembling world be reassured, let the Mother Church of the nations and the ages be heartened, by this crowning public proof of your faith in the Presence, the Power, the Promises of your Eucharistic King!

* * *

Y ahora, para terminar, dos palabras, todavía, en una lengua para vosotros conocida, que en estos momentos solemnes Nos ha parecido oportuno utilizar, no sólo por lo que ella supone en vuestra gloriosa historia, sino también, y mucho más, por lo que ha significado como elemento providencial para la evangelización de un gran pueblo —el vuestro—, cuya especial vocación parece ser la de abanderado mayor del Evangelio y de la Cruz en esas playas extremas del mundo abiertas, como una promesa, a las inconmensurables extensiones del Pacífico.

Sí, Venerables Hermanos y amados hijos: en medio de una humanidad que se diría en plena fermentación; en una época en que los períodos históricos se amontonan a tal velocidad, que más que sucederse parece que se empujan y se arrollan; en un tiempo en que por todas partes y ahí mismo, en vuestro derredor, se tiene la impresión de que los pueblos se conmueven, se agitan, piden, exigen y quieren hacer escuchar su voz; la nación Filipina Nos parece que tiene una misión a la que no podrá faltar, pero a la que tampoco conseguirá ser fiel, si previamente no se reafirma bien en sus seculares cimientos sobre la roca viva de la Verdad, como una columna que busca el fondo en esos abismos insondables del Pacífico, para que luego se pueda edificar sobre ella un templo grandioso al verdadero Dios, bajo cuyas bóvedas haya lugar para todos esos pueblos, que, como jardín frondoso en primavera, van surgiendo en medio de ese mar amplio, generoso y bravío.

Elementos de esa solidez serán la caridad mutua que os demostraréis en la vida social, donde la disminución de las distancias que separan a las diversas categorías servirá para estrechar vuestra unión; el interés que pondréis en defender la estabilidad de la familia y la educación cristiana de vuestras futuras generaciones; la fidelidad a vuestras viejas tradiciones, entre las que destacan necesariamente el rezo cotidiano del Santo Rosario y la frecuencia de Sacramentos. Frutos de ésta, serán la energía vital para rechazar las novedades impregnadas de materialismo, sensualidad e indiferentismo; el verdadero sentido universal y católico, especialmente en vosotros donde se pueden admirar los preciosos resultados de esas tres corrientes que son el sano indigenismo autóctono, el recio catolicismo y el espíritu abierto; el pujante dinamismo y la amplia generosidad y comprensión que son acaso las características de las potentes influencias modernas que experimentáis; y, finalmente, el sincero amor a la Iglesia y a su servicio, especialmente fomentando las vocaciones eclesiásticas y religiosas, cuya necesidad tanto sentís. Haciendo así, seréis dignos de conservar no sólo lo que fuisteis siempre, sino también los auténticos artífices de ese Mundo Mejor que vuestro presente Congreso os habrá enseñado a edificar en la escuela de ese divino Corazón que acabáis de adorar, fuente verdadera de todo bien, manantial inagotable de toda gracia, principio seguro de todo progreso, base firmísima de toda sólida edificación, consuelo cierto de todas las almas, alimento indispensable de vida, luz radiante del mundo entero, imán y centro irresistible de todos los corazones.

¡Que vuestra consagración a El no sea una fórmula vacía, sino una realidad fecundad! ¡Que pronto podáis repetirla en el magnifico Santuario que vuestra filial piedad quiere dedicarle! ¡Y que El os haga, en esta nueva fase de vuestra historia, tan grandes, tan benéficos, tan dichosos y, sobre todo, tan buenos cristianos, como vuestro padre el Papa, que tanto os ama, de todo corazón os desea!

Prenda de tantas gracias y prueba del especialísimo afecto que os profesamos, quiere ser la Bendición Apostólica que de todo corazón os otorgamos.

*AAS48 (1956) 834-838.

Copyright © Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See