MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISSIGNED BY CARDINAL PIETRO PAROLIN, SECRETARY OF STATE,TO THE YOUNG PEOPLE GATHERED IN VALENCIA (SPAIN)ON THE OCCASION OF THE MEETING ORGANIZED BY THE TAIZÉ COMMUNITY

Dear Young People,

You have gathered by the thousands in Valencia, Spain, for the 38th European Meeting brought to life by the Taizé community. The theme of mercy, which brings you together and which you will deepen during all of 2016, brings Pope Francis particularly close to you, becausethe Jubilee of Mercy, which he inducted, opened on 8 December. It is his wish “that, during this Jubilee, the Christian people may reflect on the corporal and spiritual works of mercy” (Bull of Indiction of the Extraordinary Jubilee of Mercy). The Holy Father wholeheartedly thanks you for the contribution you make with the creative strength and imagination of your youth.

You also desire that mercy be manifested in all its dimensions, including social ones. The Pope encourages you to persevere on this journey, to have the courage of mercy which will lead you not only to receive it yourselves, in your personal lives, but also to draw near to people in need. As you know, the Church is present for the whole of humanity and “wherever there are Christians, everyone should find an oasis of mercy” (ibid.). This is precisely what your communities can become.

This is particularly the case for the numerous migrants, who have such need of your welcome. Recently, on the occasion of the centenary of the birth of the Founder of the Taizé community, the Pope wrote to Brother Alois: “Br Roger loved the poor, the disowned, who seemingly counted for nothing. He showed, with his existence and with that of his brothers, that prayer goes hand in hand with human solidarity”. Through your practice of solidarity and mercy, may you be able to experience the joy which is exigent and rich in the meaning to which the Gospel calls you.

The Holy Father hopes that in the course of these beautiful days that bring you together in Valencia, praying and sharing among you, you may even better discover Christ, “the face of the Father’s mercy”. He previously spoke through the Prophet Hosea when the latter conveyed the following message to his people: “I desire love and not sacrifice”.

From the bottom of his heart, Pope Francis imparts his blessing to you, young participants at the meeting, to the Taizé Brothers, as well as to all those who welcome you in Valencia and the surrounding regions.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See