JOHN PAUL II

ANGELUS

Castel GandolfoSunday, 12 September 2004

1. According to an ancient tradition, today we are celebratingthe feast of the Holy Name of Mary.Indissolubly linked to the Name of Jesus, for Christians this name is the sweetest, for it reminds everyone of the Mother they have in common. Jesus, dying, entrusted us all to her as children.

May Mary watch over humanity in this time that is marked byoverwhelming explosions of violence.May she watch especially over the new generations who are eager to build a future of hope for one and all.

2. I also noticed this deep aspiration to a world of justice and peace in the children, young people and adults ofItalian Catholic Action,whom I met last SundayatLoretoon the occasion of their national pilgrimage.

I am grateful to the Lord for having given me the opportunity to take part in this important ecclesial event, which culminated in the proclamation ofthree new Blesseds:Alberto Marvelli,Pina SurianoandPere Tarrés i Claret.

In recalling their witness, I would like here to recall thethree dutiesI entrusted to Catholic Action: "contemplation", to walkon the path of holiness; "communion", to promotethe spirituality of unity; and "mission",to be Gospel leaveneverywhere.

3. May Our Lady helpCatholic Actionto persevere enthusiastically in its commitment to apostolic witness, always working in close connection with the hierarchy, taking a responsible part in the pastoral work of the parish and the Diocese.

The Church is counting on the active presence ofCatholic Actionand its faithful devotion to the great cause of Christ's Kingdom.I too look to Catholic Action with great confidence,and I encourage all its members to be generous witnesses of the Good News of the Gospel in orderto restore hopeto contemporary society which is in search of peace.

After the Angelus, the Pope said:

I greet the International Ecumenical Working Group for Pastoral Care Among Deaf People, with gratitude for their efforts to bring God's Word to the hearing impaired. I also welcome the new students of the University of Dallas Rome Program. Upon all the English-speaking pilgrims and visitors I cordially invoke God's Blessings of joy and peace.

© Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See