RADIO MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS PIUS XIIBROUGHT FOR THE FIRST TIME ON TELEVISION*

Sunady, 27 March 1949

Those men, therefore, when they saw what a miracle Jesus had perfomed, exclaimed, « This is certainly the Prophet, who was to come into the world! ». (Io. 6, 14; Gospel for Laetare Sunday).

You have taken joyously to heart, beloved in Christ, the moving and consoling lesson of this morning's Gospel for Laetare Sunday.

It is the charity of the living Christ which bears visible witness to His divinity, confirming before the eyes of all the truth of what He says He is and means to us as one family, one fold, one kingdom of nations united, at peace with God and with ourselves.

The miracle of the loaves is one more eloquent proof of His power, His nearness, His pity for our weakness, His providence for all our human need. More perfectly far than even this wonder of television, He brings our minds and hearts together by doing the truth in charity for all to see (cfr.Eph. 4, 15).

You are His living members, dear sons and daughters of America. Your charity, too, as every one knows, has become a symbol, a byword, an argument more forceful and heartening than any word or image, for the abiding human and divine love of Christ, the Saviour and Peace-maker, Who dwells in your hearts and homes.

As you renew, on this Laetare Sunday, the generous, unselfish gesture, which only He can inspire and fittingly reward, We are glad to have you know and hear-and even see-something of the Holy Father's paternal joy and pride in your constancy. And to the end that a grateful world may continue to recognize the love of the living Christ in your good works, and glorify your Father Who is in Heaven (cfr.Matth. 5, 16), may the Blessing of Almigthy God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, descend upon you and remain forever!

*Discorsi e Radiomessaggi di Sua Santità Pio XII, XI,Undecimo anno di Pontificato, 2 marzo 1949 - 1° marzo 1950, p. 25Tipografia Poliglotta Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See