ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIVTO THE ORGANIZING COMMITTEE OF THE INITIATIVE“FROM CRISIS TO CARE: CATHOLIC ACTION FOR CHILDREN”

Clementine HallThursday, 5 February 2026

[Multimedia]

_________________________________

Welcome to all of you.My dear brothers and sisters,

As you gather to carry forward the commitments that were the fruit of the International Summit on Children’s Rights, convened by my predecessor,Pope Francis, at this same time last year, I extend a warm welcome to all of you. Please be assured of my prayers as you seek to discern the Lord’s will and read the “signs of the times” related to the impact of world crises on God’s “little ones.”

It is indeed a tragedy that the children and youth of our world, the ones Jesus wanted to come to him, are so often deprived of care and access to the basic necessities of life. Likewise, they frequently have few opportunities for achieving their God-given potential. Regrettably, I see that the situation of children today has not improved during the past year, and it is also of deep concern to learn of the lack of progress in protecting children from danger. One must question whether global commitments for sustainable development have been cast aside when we see in our global human family that so many children still live in extreme poverty, suffer abuse and are forcibly displaced, not to mention that they lack proper education and are isolated or separated from their families.

This brings to mindPope Francis’powerful emphasis on the child’s“right to receive love from a mother and a father; both are necessary for a child’s integral and harmonious development”(Amoris Laetitia, 172).Let us always affirm and defend the “profound vision of life as a gift to be cherished, and of the family as its responsible guardian,” considering it “deplorable that public resources are allocated to suppress life, rather than being invested to support mothers and families” (Address to Members of the Diplomatic Corps Accredited to the Holy See, 9 January 2026).

In this regard, I welcome your commitment to develop effective ways to address the concerns raised at the Summit on Children’s Rights. As you carry out this task, I would like to mention two important points. First, you are speaking on behalf of those who have no voice. This is a truly noble task. Keep that in mind when the temptation to be discouraged arises because of failed initiatives, seeming lack of interest from others or the sense that the situation is not improving. Let the good you know you are doing carry you forward.

The second point concerns the need to focus on the transversal needs of children, which can easily go unnoticed when care is focused on just one area of need. In this sense, I realize that the particular way in which each of you is addressing the needs of children is in conformity with your specific charisms and specializations within your local Church structures, religious congregations and Catholic-inspired organizations. I urge you, however, to find ways to work together in greater harmony so that children receive care that is well balanced, taking into consideration their physical, psychological and spiritual welfare.The Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development, as well as thePontifical Academy for Life, the Union of Superiors General and the International Union of Superiors General are accompanying you in this effort, and I encourage all of you to develop concrete steps and action plans to address the transversal needs of children.

Pope Francisoften reminded us of the need to listen to children and he proved to be an exemplary teacher in this regard. I will close, therefore, citing the letter which the children presented to him at last year’s Summit. They said: “Together with you, we want to cleanse the world of bad things, color it with friendship and respect, and help you build a beautiful future for everyone!” Imploring the intercession of Mary, Mother of the Church, I pray that God may bless all of you and give you strength and courage as you assist children in making these dreams a reality.

Thank you.

We ask the Lord’s blessings upon all of you and we remember in prayer especially children, especially those who suffer and do not have the basic needs with which to live, and we pray: Our Father…

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See