JUBILEE OF THE WORLD OF EDUCATION

HOLY MASSAND PROCLAMATION OF ST. JOHN HENRY NEWMAN AS “DOCTOR OF THE CHURCH”

HOMILY OF POPE LEO XIV

St Peter's SquareAll Saints' Day - Saturday, 1stNovember 2025

[Multimedia]

________________________________________

On this Solemnity of All Saints, it is a great joy to include Saint John Henry Newman among the Doctors of the Church, and, at the same time, on the occasion of theJubilee of the World of Education, to name him, together with Saint Thomas Aquinas, as co-Patron of the Church’s educational mission. Newman’s impressive spiritual and cultural stature will surely serve as an inspiration to new generations whose hearts thirst for the infinite, and who, through research and knowledge, are willing to undertake that journey which, as the ancients said, takes usper aspera ad astra, through difficulties to the stars.

The lives of the saints teach us that it is possible to live passionately amidst the complexity of the present, without neglecting the apostolic mandate to “shine like stars in the world” (Phil2:15). On this solemn occasion, I wish to say to teachers and educational institutions: “Shine today like stars in the world” through your authentic commitment to the collective search for truth and to sharing it with generosity and integrity. Indeed, you do so through your service to young people, especially the poor, and your daily witness to the fact that “Christian love is prophetic: it works miracles” (Apostolic ExhortationDilexi Te, 120).

The Jubilee is a pilgrimage of hope, and all of you, in the great field of education, know well how much hope is an indispensable seed! When I reflect on schools and universities, I think of them as laboratories of prophecy, where hope is lived, and constantly discussed and encouraged.

This is also the meaning of the Beatitudes proclaimed in today’s Gospel. The Beatitudes bring with them a new interpretation of reality. They are both the path and the message of Jesus the Teacher. At first glance, it seems impossible to declare as blessed those who are poor, or those who hunger and thirst for justice, the persecuted or the peacemakers. Yet, that which seems inconceivable in the world’s thinking is filled with meaning and light when brought into contact with the Kingdom of God. In the saints, we see this kingdom approaching and becoming present among us. Saint Matthew rightly presents the Beatitudes as a teaching, depicting Jesus as a Master, who transmits a new perspective on things, which is reflected in his own journey. The Beatitudes, however, are not just another teaching; they are the teachingpar excellence. In the same way, the Lord Jesus is not just one of many teachers, he is the Masterpar excellence. Moreover, he is the Educatorpar excellence. We are his disciples and are in his “school.” We learn how to discover in his life, namely in the path he has travelled, a horizon of meaning capable of shining a light on all forms of knowledge. May our schools and universities always be places of listening to the Gospel and putting it into practice!

Responding to today’s challenges may sometimes seem beyond our capabilities, but this is not the case. Let us not allow pessimism to defeat us! I recall what my beloved predecessorPope Francisemphasized in hisAddress to the First Plenary Assembly of the Dicastery for Culture and Education: that we must work together to set humanity free from the encircling gloom of nihilism, which is perhaps the most dangerous malady of contemporary culture, since it threatens to “cancel” hope.[1]This reference to the darkness that surrounds us echoes one of Saint John Henry Newman’s best-known texts, the hymn “Lead, Kindly Light.” In that beautiful prayer, we come to realize that we are far from home, our feet are unsteady, we cannot interpret clearly the way ahead. Yet none of this impedes us, since we have found our Guide: “Lead, Kindly Light, amid th’encircling gloom, Lead Thou me on;” “Lead, Kindly Light, The night is dark, and I am far from home, Lead Thou me on.”

The task of education is precisely to offer thisKindly Lightto those who might otherwise remain imprisoned by the particularly insidious shadows of pessimism and fear. For this reason, I would like to say to you: let us disarm the false reasons for resignation and powerlessness, and let us share the great reasons for hope in today’s world. Let us reflect upon and point out to others those “constellations” that transmit light and guidance at this present time, which is darkened by so much injustice and uncertainty. I thus encourage you to ensure that schools, universities and every educational context, even those that are informal or street-based, are always gateways to a civilization of dialogue and peace. Through your lives, let the “great multitude” shine forth, of which the Book of Revelation speaks in today’s liturgy, and which “no one could number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages,” and which stood “before the Lamb” (7:9).

In the biblical text, one of the elders observing the multitude asks: “Who are these… and from where have they come” (Rev7:13). In this regard, in the field of education too, the Christian gaze rests on those who have come “out of the great tribulation” (v. 14) and recognizes in them the faces of so many brothers and sisters of every language and culture who, through the narrow gate of Jesus, have entered into the fullness of life. And so, once again, we must ask ourselves: “Does this mean that the less gifted are not human beings? Or that the weak do not have the same dignity as ourselves? Are those born with fewer opportunities of lesser value as human beings? Should they limit themselves merely to surviving? The worth of our societies, and our own future, depends on the answers we give to these questions” (Apostolic ExhortationDilexi Te, 95). We can say, too, that the evangelical value of our education also depends on the answers we give.

The lasting legacy of Saint John Henry Newman includes some very significant contributions to the theory and practice of education. He wrote, “God has created me to do Him some definite service; He has committed some work to me which He has not committed to another. I have my mission—I never may know it in this life, but I shall be told it in the next” (Meditations and Devotions, III, I, 2). In these words, we find beautifully expressed the mystery of the dignity of every human person, and also the variety of gifts distributed by God.

Life shines brightly not because we are rich, beautiful or powerful. Instead, it shines when we discover within ourselves the truth that we are called by God, have a vocation, have a mission, that our lives serve something greater than ourselves. Every single creature has a role to play. The contribution that each person can make is uniquely valuable, and the task of educational communities is to encourage and cherish that contribution. Let us not forget that at the heart of the educational journey we do not find abstract individuals but real people, especially those who seem to be underperforming according to the parameters of economies that exclude or even kill them. We are called to form people, so that they may shine like stars in their full dignity.

We can say, then, that from a Christian perspective education helps everyone to become saints. Nothing less will do.Pope Benedict XVI, on hisApostolic Journey to Great Britain in September 2010, during whichhe beatified John Henry Newman, invitedyoung people to become saints with these words: “What God wants most of all for each one of you is that you should become holy. He loves you much more than you could ever begin to imagine.”[2]This is the universal call to holiness that theSecond Vatican Councilmade an essential part of its message (cf.Lumen Gentium, Chapter V). And holiness is intended for everyone, without exception, as a personal and communal journey marked out by the Beatitudes.

I pray that Catholic education will help each person to discover their own call to holiness. Saint Augustine, whom Saint John Henry Newman greatly admired, once said that we are fellow students who have one Teacher, whose school is on earth and whose chair is in heaven (cf.Serm.292,1).

______________________________

[1]Cf. FRANCIS,Address to the Participants of the Plenary Assembly of the Dicastery for Culture and Education(21 November 2024).

[2]BENEDICT XVI,Address to Pupils(17 September 2010).

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See