ADDRESS OF PAUL VITO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINESTO THE HOLY SEE*

Monday, 10 November 1975

Mr Ambassador,

As we receivewith pleasure the Letters accrediting Your Excellency as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of the Philippines, we express our gratitude for the courteous words with which you have addressed us and we gladly reciprocate the kind greetings of His Excellency President Marcos.

Your references to our visit to your country are especially welcome in these present days, as we commemorate the fifth anniversary of our apostolic journey to Asia. We recall in particular the poor in the Philippines, friends whom we visited in their homes.You have spoken of steps being taken, along the guidelines of Christian tradition, to alleviate their condition. The Church will truly continue to play her part in such efforts, since, as we said to the Filipino People when we were among them, “Christianity can be salvation also on the earthly and human level”, for it is Christ who “has planted in the hearts of his followers the talent for love and service on behalf of all man’s sufferings and needs” (AAS63, 1971, p. 34).

You have spoken both of the long and proud history of the Church in your country and of the important geographical and cultural relationship of the Church there to present and future developments in Asia. In our current invitation to reflection and meditation for the coming Day of Peace, an event to which you have alluded so appreciatively, we too look forward tothe future, to the world of ideal humanity still to be born. We envisage civilization as walking in the footsteps of peace. May the noble Catholic nation which you represent truly be in the vanguard of this unfolding history, contributing tirelessly to the ordered procession of peace, civilization and justice. All this will demand personal sacrifice, clemency, mercy and love, qualities which our Message for the Day of Peace calls for from the followers and servants of the Gospel.

Mr Ambassador, we gladly invoke Almighty God’s blessings upon the Authorities and People of the Philippines, and as we extend to you a warm personal welcome at the beginning of your mission we pledge to you the help and cooperation of the Holy See.

*AAS67 (1975), p.706.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. XIII, p.1258-1259.

L’Attività della Santa Sede 1975, p.371-372.

L'Osservatore Romano10-11.11.1975, p.1.

ORa n.48 p.2.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See