MEDITATION OF THE HOLY FATHERON THE GLORIOUS MYSTERIES OF THE ROSARY

Saturday, 7 October 2000

1. At the end of this intense moment of Marian prayer, I wish to offer a cordial greeting to all of you, dear Brothers in the Episcopate, and I gladly extend it to the many faithful who are with us this evening here in St Peter's Square or have joined us by radio and television.

As we gathered in Rome for the Jubilee of Bishops, the First Saturday of the month of October could only prompt us to pray together at the feet of the Blessed Virgin, whom the People of God venerate this day with the titleQueen of the Holy Rosary.

In particular, our prayer this evening takes place in the light of the"message of Fátima",whose content helps us to reflect on the history of the 20th century. To reinforce this spiritual perspective, we are fortunate to have in our midst therevered image of Our Lady of Fátima,which I have the joy of welcoming back to the Vatican, in this solemn setting, with my Brothers in the Episcopate and with so many priests, religious and faithful who have gathered this evening in this square.

2. We have meditated on the"glorious mysteries".From heaven where the Lord has taken her, Mary ceaselessly directs our gaze to the glory of the Risen Christ, in whom the victory of God and of his loving plan over evil and death is revealed. As Bishops, who share in Christ's sufferings and glory (cf. 1Pt5: 1), we arethe first witnesses to this victory,the basis of sure hope for every individual and for the whole human race.

Jesus Christ, the Risen One,has sent us into the whole worldto proclaim his Gospel of salvation, and in the course of 20 centuries the message has spread from Jerusalem tothe five continents.This evening our prayerhas spiritually united the human family around Mary, Regina Mundi.

3. In the context of the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, we wanted to express the Church's gratitude for the motherly care that Mary has always shown to her children on their pilgrimage through time. There is no century or people in which she has not made her presence felt, bringing light, hope and comfort to the faithful, especially the lowly and the poor.

Trusting in her motherly care, at the end of our Eucharistic concelebration tomorrow we will collegially make our"Act of Entrustment"to the Immaculate Heart of Mary.This evening, while meditating on the glorious mysteries of the Holy Rosary,we prepared inwardly for this act,taking the attitude of theApostles in the Upper Room, gathered with Maryin unanimous and united prayer.

For each of you, dear Brothers, and for your ministry I have invoked and am invoking the special intercession of the Mother of the Church. May she always assist you in the difficult yet exhilarating task ofbringing the Gospel to every part of the world,so that every human being, beginning with the lowliest and the poorest, will receive the Good News of Christ the Saviour.

© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See