8th WORLD YOUTH DAY

MASS CELEBRATED WITH THE BISHOPS GATHEREDIN THE CATHEDRAL OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION

HOMILY OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II

Friday, 13 August 1993

"On this rock I will build my Church"(Matth16,18).

Dear Brother Bishops,

1.These words of Christ, which he pronounced near Caesarea Philippi, resound again today in the Cathedral of Denver. Here, in Colorado, at the foot of the Rocky Mountains, they acquire a special significance.What is this rock on which Christ builds his Church? Rather, who is this rock?This is the order of the questions which Christ’s words suggest.

Replying, Jesus says who Simon is – "You are Peter" (Matth16,18); that is,you are Rock. It is theperson of Peter, in so far as he confesses the apostolic faith, who is the living stone, assimilated to Christ as the Church’s foundation (cf.Eph2,20).

2. From the Altar of the Cathedral of Denver I warmly greet each one of you, who are taking part in the World Youth Day. You are here, just as I am, out of fidelity to our specific ministry in the Church. We are hereto be with the young pilgrims, during these days in which we are witnesses of the grace of the Holy Spirit at work in so many generous young hearts.

In this interior advancement of grace, we Bishops and priests have a great responsibility. Are we always ready to help the young people discover the transcendent elements of the Christian life? From our words and actions do they conclude that the Church is indeed a mystery of communion with the Blessed Trinity, and not just a human institution with temporal aims? Through our ministry the young people present here need to be able todiscover, above all, that they are Temples of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in them (cf.1Cor3,16).

For they are the Church of today and tomorrow – the Church that rises on the rock of Divine Truth,on the rock of the apostolic faith. The Church of the Third Millennium needs to be firmly planted in the heart of the new generation of the sons and daughters of the Living God.

3. Venerable and dear Brothers!

Let us entrust to her prayersourselvesand our brother priests, all those who live the consecrated life, all our brothers and sisters in the faith. May she guideour ministryhere in Denver. And may this whole experience of the World Youth Day be for us a re–awakening of trust in the "keys of the kingdom of heaven" which Christ entrusted to the Church in the person of Peter (cf.Matth16,19). Amen.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See