ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE KNIGHTS OF COLUMBUS

Monday, 10 April 1978

Dear sons and daughters,

We are very happytoday to welcome the Knights of Columbus and their families. We are indeed grateful for your sentiments of devotion and loyalty. You represent a Catholic organization with over a million members. And all of you and your families are now present in our thoughts and in our hearts. We look upon you as an immense force for good within the Church of Christ: lay people supported and assisted by the clergy, in union with the Bishops and with us.

On this occasion we wish to express our gratitude for the works that the Knights of Columbus have accomplished over the years. In particular, we thank you for your collaboration in our television apostolate. Assisted by your generosity, we have been enabled to proclaim the Lord Jesus Christ directly in millions of homes. Yes, the ideals of your Christian love and service have brought forth results worthy of the Gospel. With Saint Paul we can tell you: “We remember you in our prayers, for we are constantly mindful before our God and Father of the way you are proving your faith, and laboring in love... ” (1Thess. 1, 2-3).

We rely on you-on each of you, on all of you, on the association itself, the Knights of Columbus-to bring holiness to the world, to live the Gospel values in your families, to transmit them to your children with the infectious conviction of joyful faith. Christ needs you to bring fraternal concern to your neighborhoods, to exemplify justice in your communities, to spread peace and truth in the world.

Yes, dear sons and daughters, in the name of Christ and with an ever increased realization of the importance of your calling, continue all your praiseworthy activities for the glory of God and the good of humanity: projects of charitable assistance, the promotion of Catholic education and of vocations, the spreading of Christ’s uplifting Gospel through the splendid possibilities of the mass media, and the incomparable service of defending life. Frequent opportunities for service are offered within your parish communities.

We think that your goals are very clear. The Church fortifies you with the word of God and with the sacraments. Jesus Christ is with you. He gives you his strength; he sustains you in his love; he calls you personally to share in his life and in his mission of salvation.

In the name of Jesus we bless you all: all the Knights of Columbus and their families.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See