POPE FRANCIS

ANGELUS

Saint Peter's SquareSunday, 29 November 2020

[Multimedia]

Dear Brothers and Sisters, Good Morning,

Today, the First Sunday of Advent, a new liturgical year begins. In it, the Church marks the passage of time with the celebration of the main events in Jesus’ life and the story of salvation. In so doing, as Mother, she illuminates the path of our existence, supports us in our daily affairs and guides us towards the final encounter with Christ. Today’s liturgy invites us to live the first “important Season”, which is that of Advent, the first of the liturgical year, Advent, which prepares us for Christmas, and is therefore a time ofexpectation,it is a time ofhope. Expectation and hope.

Saint Paul (cf. 1Cor1:3-9) indicates the object of our expectation. What is it? The “revealing of our Lord” (v. 7). The Apostle invites the Christians of Corinth, and we too, to focus our attention on the encounter with Jesus. For a Christian the most important thing is the continuous encounter with the Lord, being with the Lord. And in this way, accustomed to staying with the Lord of life, we prepare ourselves for the encounter, for being with the Lord for eternity. And this definitive encounter will come at the end of the world. However, the Lord comes every day, so that, with his grace, we might accomplish good in our own lives and in the lives of others. Our God is a God-who-comes, do not forget this: God is a God who comes, who continually comes. He does not disappoint our expectation. The Lord never disappoints. He will perhaps make us wait, he will make us wait a few moments in the dark to allow our expectation to ripen, but he never disappoints. The Lord always comes, He is always by our side. At times he does not make himself seen, but he always comes. He came at a precise moment in history and became man to take on our sins — the feast of the Nativity commemorates Jesus’ first coming in the historical moment —; He will come at the end of times as universal judge; He also comes a third time, in a third manner: He comes every day to visit his people, to visit every man and woman who receives him in the Word, in the Sacraments, in their brothers and sisters. Jesus, the Bible tells us, is at the door and knocks. Every day. He is at the door to our heart. He knocks. Do you know how to listen to the Lord who knocks, who has come today to visit you, who knocks at your heart restlessly, with an idea, with inspiration? He came to Bethlehem, he will come at the end of the world, but every day he comes to us. Be attentive, look at what you feel in your heart when the Lord knocks.

We are well aware that life is made up of highs and lows, of lights and shadows. Each one of us experiences moments of disappointment, of failure and bewilderment. Moreover, the situation we are living in, marked by the pandemic, generates worry, fear and discouragement in many people; we run the risk of falling into pessimism, the risk of falling into closure and apathy. How should we react in the face of all this? Today’s Psalm suggests: “Our soul waits for the Lord: he is our help and shield. Yes, our heart is glad in him, because we trust in his holy name” (Ps33:20-21). That is, the soul awaiting, confidently waiting for the Lord, allows us to find comfort and courage in the dark moments of our lives. And what gives rise to this courage and this trustful pledge? Where do they come from? They are born ofhope. And hope does not disappoint, that virtue that leads us ahead, looking at the encounter with the Lord.

Advent is a continuous call to hope: it reminds us that God is present in history to lead it to its ultimate goal, to lead it to its fullness, which is the Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ. God is present in the history of humanity, He is the “God-with-us”, God is not distant, he is always with us, to the extent that very often he knocks on the door to our heart. God walks beside us to support us. The Lord does not abandon us; He accompanies us through the events of our lives to help us discover the meaning of the journey the meaning of everyday life, to give us courage when we are under duress or suffering. In the midst of life’s storms, God always extends his hand to us and frees us from threats. This is beautiful! In the book of Deuteronomy there is a very beautiful passage, in which the Prophet says to the people: “For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as the Lord our God is to us?”. No-one, only we have this grace of having God close to us. We await God, we hope that he manifests himself, but he too hopes that we manifest ourselves to him!

May Mary Most Holy, woman of expectation, accompany our steps at the beginning of this new liturgical year, and help us to fulfil the task of Jesus’ disciples, indicated by the Apostle Peter: And what is this task? To account for the hope that is in us (cf. 1Pet3:15).

After the Angelus the Holy Father continued:

Dear brothers and sisters, I would like to express again my closeness to the people of Central America, who were struck by strong hurricanes. In particular I recall the Islands of San Andrés, Providencia and Santa Catalina, as well as the Pacific coast of the north of Colombia. I pray for all the countries that are suffering due to these disasters.

I renew my warm greeting to you, the faithful of Rome and pilgrims from various countries. In particular, I greet those who, unfortunately in very limited numbers, have come on the occasion of thecreation of the new Cardinals, which took place yesterday afternoon. Let us pray for the thirteen new members of the College of Cardinals.

I wish you all a happy Sunday and a blessed Advent journey. Let us try to bring out the good even from the difficult situation that the pandemic imposes upon us: greater sobriety, discreet and respectful attention to our neighbours who may be in need, some prayer also within the family, with simplicity. These three things will help us greatly: greater sobriety, discreet and respectful attention to our neighbours who may be in need, and, very importantly, some moments of prayer within the family, with simplicity. Please, do not forget to pray for me. Enjoy your lunch.Arrivederci.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See