ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS PAUL VITO THE AMBASSADOR OF PERU TO THE HOLY SEE*

Thursday, 23 June 1977

Mr. Ambassador.

In this act of presenting the Letters which accredit you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Peru to the Holy See, we are happy to extend to Your Excellency our most cordial welcome.

We listened with deep satisfaction to your expressive words. We see in them a clear testimony not only of the religious sentiments which animate the Peruvian people, but also of loyal recognition of the fruitful presence of the Church in your country. Since at every moment she has shared its human and spiritual course, this has given her a characteristic image.

As Your Excellency has just observed, in carrying out her specific work, far from being actuated by temporal motives, the Church continues to put at the disposition of human society the light and energies that spring incessantly from her mission of salvation And such was out thought, to which Your Excellency also referred, when year after year we made a repeated appeal to spare no effort in favour of the cause of peace.

Today, more than ever, concerns, hopes and efforts converge towards this urgent goal. In proportion as it is given encouragement and vigour, there will arise and glow initiatives which, overcoming aims conflicting with the dignity of the human person, will be directed resolutely at giving man the resources necessary for the complete development of his talents, and at sustaining him in his aspiration to reach a brotherly way of life in the midst of a community that is more and more just, free and really human.

We know very well that these ideals have found an insistent echo in Peru. In this sense we rejoice to see how the Church, Pastors and faithful, are carrying out an intense activity, in solidarity with everything that aims at promoting the common good, but attentive abuse all to the cultural, moral and material progress of the neediest. o Mr. Ambassador, with out goodwill and out best wishes for the successful accomplishment of the mission entrusted to you by the President of Peru, whom we thank for his respectful greeting, we ask Your Excellency to convey our best regards to the authorities and to all our beloved Peruvian sons, on whom we invoke abundant divine blessings.

*ORa n.28 p.4.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See