PONTIFICAL COMMISSIONFOR MOTION PICTURES, RADIO AND TELEVISION

STATUTES

Art. 1

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television is hereby established by the Holy See.

Art. 2

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television is the organ of the Holy See for the study of the problems of film, radio and television, which are related to faith and morals.

Art. 3

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television has the following functions: to follow the doctrinal and the practical trends of film production and of radio and television transmission; to direct the activity of Catholics and to further the execution of directives issued by the Supreme Ecclesiastical Authority.

Art. 4

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television is at the disposition of the Sacred Congregations and Offices of the Holy See and of the Most Reverend Ordinaries to furnish information and to study questions proposed by them.

Art. 5

To the end of encouraging productions and transmissions conformable to the Christian spirit and to protect the faithful from those morally dangerous, the Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television shall maintain close contact with the National Catholic Film, Radio and Television Centres and with the respective International Organizations (O. C. I. C., UNDA), exchanging information, collaborating with them and fostering their activity.

Art. 6

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television shall normally abstain from publishing favourable or unfavourable judgements on films, or on radio and television programs, referring them, in the spirit of the norms issued in this regard by the Holy See, to the respective National Centres established in each country by the Hierarchy.

Art. 7

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television is appointed by the Holy See and is composed of the following Members:

1)The President, whose term of office is six years;

2)The Council of the President, comprising:

a)Ex Officio Members, namely:

- The Assessor of the Sacred Congregation of the Holy Office,- The Assessor of the Sacred Consistorial Congregation,- The Assessor of the Sacred Congregation for the Oriental Church,- The Secretary of the Sacred Congregation of the Council,- The Secretary of the Sacred Congregation for Religious,- The Secretary of the Sacred Congregation for the Propagation of the Faith,- The Secretary of the Sacred Congregation of Seminaries and Universities,- The Substitute of the Secretariat of State of His Holiness.

b)Four Members, at most, to be freely chosen by the Holy See.

3)The Executive Committee, which is formed as follows:

- The President of the Commission,- An Executive Secretary,- Three or more Consultors, among whom the Director of Vatican Radio is numbered Ex Officio,- A College of Experts with three sections: Motion Pictures, Radio and Television.

The Members of the Executive Committee remain in office for four years.

Art. 8

The Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television has its headquarters in the Vatican City.

FINAL PROVISION

With the publication of the present Statutes in the "Acta Apostolicae Sedis", the Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures, Radio and Television replaces the Pontifical Commission for Motion Pictures.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See