PASTORAL VISIT TO VITERBO AND BAGNOREGIO

PRAYER OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVITO OUR LADY OF THE OAK TREE

Dear Sisters,

It is a true joy for me to be able to meet with you in this place so dear to popular devotion. You nuns who live a contemplative life have the mission within the Church to be torches that, in the silence of the monastery, burn with prayer and with love for God. I entrust to you my intentions, the intentions of the Pastor of this Diocese and the needs of those who live in this land. Above all, in thisYear for Priests, I entrust to you the priests, seminarians and vocations. In your prayerful silence, may you be their support "from afar" and convey to them your spiritual motherhood, offering to the Lord the sacrifice of your lives for their sanctification and for the good of souls. I thank you for your presence and I bless you wholeheartedly; please extend the Pope's greeting and Blessing also to your Sisters who were unable to attend. I ask you now to join with me in invoking Mary's maternal protection upon this diocesan community and upon the inhabitants of this land, rich in religious and cultural traditions.

Holy Virgin, Our Lady of the Oak,Patroness of the Diocese of Viterbo,gathered together in this Shrineconsecrated to you,we extend to you a plea anda confident prayer:Watch over the Successor of Peterand over the Churchentrusted to his care;watch over this diocesan communityand its pastors,over Italy, over Europe andover the other continents.Queen of Peace, obtain for usthe gift of harmony and peacefor all peoples and all mankind.

Obedient Virgin, Mother of Christ,who, with your docile "yes" tothe Angel's announcement,became the Mother of the Almighty,help all your children to followthe plans that the heavenly Fatherhas for each one, in orderto cooperate in the universal planof redemption which Christ fulfilledby dying on the Cross.

Virgin of Nazareth,Queen of the family,make our Christian familiesschools of evangelical life,enriched by the gift of many vocationsto the priesthood andto the consecrated life.Keep intact the unity of our families,today so threatened from all sides.making them hearths of serenity andof harmony, where patient dialoguedispels difficulties and differences.Above all, watch over thosewho are divided and in crisis,Mother of forgivenessand reconciliation.

Immaculate Virgin,Mother of the Church,nourish the enthusiasm of eachcomponent of our Dioceses:of parishes and ecclesial groups,of associations and new formsof apostolic commitmentthat the Lord inspires withhis Holy Spirit;keep steadfast and determinedthe will of those whomthe Guardian of the massescontinues to call as labourersin his vineyard, so that,resisting every worldly enticementand temptation,they may persevere generouslyalong the path they have taken,and with your maternal aid,become witnesses to Christwho are drawn by the splendourof his Love, source of joy.

Clement Virgin, Mother of humanity,turn your gaze tothe men and women of our time,to peoples and to thosewho govern them,to nations and to continents;comfort those who weep, who suffer,who struggle because ofhuman injustice; sustain thosewho waver under the weight of effortand who look at the futurewithout hope; encourage thosewho work to build a better worldwhere justice triumphs andbrotherhood reigns,where selfishness, hate andviolence cease.May every form andmanifestation of violencebe conquered by thepeace-making power of Christ.

Virgin of listening, Star of Hope,Mother of Mercy,the source through whichJesus came into the world,our life and our joy,we thank you and we renewthe offering of our lives, certain thatyou will never abandon us,especially in thedark and difficult moments of life.Be with us always,now and at the hour of our death.

Amen!

Viterbo, 6 September 2009

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See