APOSTOLIC JOURNEY OF POPE LEO XIVTO ALGERIA, CAMEROON, ANGOLA AND EQUATORIAL GUINEA(13–23 April 2026)

MEETING WITH THE AUTHORITIES, CIVIL SOCIETY AND THE DIPLOMATIC CORPS

ADDRESS OF POPE LEO XIV

Presidential Palace (Yaoundé)Wednesday, 15 April 2026

[Multimedia]

_____________________________

Mr President,Distinguished Authorities,Members of the Diplomatic Corps,Ladies and Gentlemen,

I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude for the warm reception I have received and for the words of welcome addressed to me. It is with deep joy that I find myself in Cameroon, often described as “Africa in miniature” because of the richness of its lands, cultures, languages and traditions. This variety is not weakness but a treasure. It constitutes a promise of fraternity and a solid foundation for building lasting peace.

I come among you as a shepherd and as a servant of dialogue, fraternity and peace. My visit is an expression of the affection of the Successor of Peter for all Cameroonians, as well as of the desire to encourage each of you to keep moving forward with enthusiasm and perseverance in building the common good. We are living, in fact, at a time when hopelessness is rampant and a sense of powerlessness tends to paralyze the renewal so deeply desired by peoples. There is such a hunger and thirst for justice! A thirst for getting involved, for a vision, for courageous choices and for peace! It is my great desire to reach the hearts of all, especially young people, who are called to help shape a world that is more just, including in the political sphere. I also wish to express my desire to strengthen the bonds of collaboration between the Holy See and the Republic of Cameroon, which are founded on mutual respect, the dignity of every human person and religious freedom.

Cameroon still carries the memory of the visits made by my Predecessors.Saint John Paul IIbore a message of hope for all the peoples of Africa, andBenedict XVIemphasized the importance of reconciliation, justice and peace, as well as the moral responsibility of those in government. I know that these are important moments in your country’s history as they are compelling exhortations to a spirit of service, unity, and justice. We may therefore ask ourselves: where are we now? How has the Word that was proclaimed to us borne fruit? And what remains to be done?

Sixteen hundred years ago, Saint Augustine wrote words that have great relevance today: “Those who rule serve those whom they seem to command; for they rule not from a love of power, but from a sense of the duty they owe to others — not because they are proud of authority, but because they love mercy.”[1]From this perspective, serving one’s country means dedicating oneself, with a clear mind and an upright conscience, to the common good of all people in the nation. This includes dedication to both the majority of the population and the minorities, as well as their mutual harmony.

Today, like many other nations, your country is facing complex difficulties. The tensions and violence that have afflicted certain regions of the Northwest, Southwest and Far North have caused profound suffering: lives have been lost, families displaced, children deprived of schooling and young people no longer see a future. Behind the numbers are the faces, stories and shattered hopes of real people. In the face of such dramatic situations, I called on the human family at the beginning of this year to reject the logic of violence and war, and to embrace a peace founded on love and justice. A peace that is unarmed, that is, not based on fear, threats or weapons, and at the same time disarming, because it is capable of resolving conflicts, opening hearts and generating trust, empathy and hope. Peace cannot be reduced to a slogan: it must be embodied in a way of life that renounces all forms of violence, both personally and institutionally. For this reason, I strongly reiterate: “The world is thirsting for peace… Enough of war, with all the pain it causes through death, destruction and exile!”[2][]This cry is intended as an appeal that contributes to the efforts for an authentic peace, prioritizing it over any partisan interest.

Peace, in fact, cannot be decreed: it must be embraced and lived. It is a gift from God, which unfolds through patient and collective effort. It is everyone’s responsibility, beginning with civil authorities. To govern means to love one’s own country as well as neighboring countries; the commandment “love your neighbor as yourself” is equally applicable to international relations! To govern means truly listening to citizens, valuing their intelligence and their ability to help build lasting solutions to problems.Pope Francispointed out the need to move beyond “the idea of social policies being a policy for the poor, but never with the poor and never of the poor, much less part of a project which can bring people back together.”[3][]

With such a change of approach, civil society must be recognized as a vital force for national cohesion. Cameroon is ready for this transition! Associations, women’s and youth organizations, trade unions, humanitarian NGOs as well as traditional and religious leaders all play an irreplaceable role in weaving the fabric of social peace. They are the first to intervene when tensions arise; they are the ones who care for the displaced, support victims, open spaces for dialogue and encourage local mediation. Their close ties to the local community enable them to understand the root causes of conflicts and to identify appropriate solutions. Civil society also contributes to shaping consciences, promoting a culture of dialogue and fostering respect for differences. In this way, civil society is preparing for a future that is less prone to uncertainty. I would like to highlight with gratitude the role played by women. They are often, unfortunately, the first victims of prejudice and violence, yet they are tireless peacemakers. Their commitment to education, mediation and the rebuilding of the social fabric is unparalleled and serves to curb corruption and abuses of power. For this reason, too, their voice must be fully recognized in decision-making processes.

In the face of such generous dedication within society, transparency in the management of public resources and respect for the rule of law are essential to restoring trust. It is time to examine our conscience and take a bold leap forward. Just and credible institutions become pillars of stability. Public authorities are called to serve as bridges, never as sources of division, even when insecurity seems prevalent. Security is a priority, but it must always be exercised with respect for human rights, combining rigor and magnanimity, with particular attention to the most vulnerable. Authentic peace arises when everyone feels protected, heard and respected, when the law serves as a secure safeguard against the whims of the rich and powerful.

Brothers and sisters, on closer reflection, the high offices you hold demand a twofold witness. The first is achieved through the collaboration of the various agencies and administrative levels of the State in the service of the people, and especially of the poor. The second is accomplished by carrying out your institutional and professional responsibilities with integrity and upright conduct.[4]Indeed, in order for peace and justice to prevail, the chains of corruption — which disfigure authority and strip it of its credibility — must be broken. Hearts must be set free from an idolatrous thirst for profit: true profit comes from integral human development, that is, the balanced growth of all the aspects that make life on this earth a blessing.

Cameroon possesses the human, cultural and spiritual resources necessary to overcome trials and conflicts and move toward a future of stability and shared prosperity. The common effort in favor of dialogue, justice and integral development must transform the wounds of the past into sources of renewal. As I have often mentioned, young people represent the hope of the country and of the Church. Their energy and creativity are priceless treasures. Of course, when unemployment and social exclusion persist, frustration can lead to violence. Investing in the education, training and entrepreneurship of young people is, therefore, a strategic choice for peace. It is the only way to curb the outflow of wonderful talent to other parts of the world. It is also the only way to combat the scourges of drugs, prostitution and apathy, which are devastating too many young lives in an increasingly dramatic way.

Thankfully, young people in Cameroon possess a deep spirituality that still resists the homogenizing influence of the market. It is a source of energy that gives value to their dreams, which are rooted in the prophecies that nourish their prayers and their hearts. When they are not twisted by the poison of fundamentalism, religious traditions inspire prophets of peace, justice, forgiveness and solidarity. By fostering interreligious dialogue and involving religious leaders in initiatives of mediation and reconciliation, politics and diplomacy can draw upon moral forces capable of easing tensions, preventing extremism and promoting a culture of mutual esteem and respect. Through her efforts in education, healthcare and charity, the Catholic Church in Cameroon desires to continue serving all citizens without distinction. The Church also wishes to work in good faith with civil authorities and all those involved in efforts to promote human dignity and reconciliation. Where possible, the Church intends to facilitate cooperation with other countries and strengthen ties between Cameroonians around the world and their communities of origin.

May God bless Cameroon, assist its leaders, guide civil society, enlighten the work of the Diplomatic Corps and grant the entire Cameroonian people — Christians and non-Christians, political leaders and citizens — the grace to welcome the Kingdom of God and so build together a future of justice and peace.

_________________________________________

[1]Saint Augustine,De civitate Dei, XIX, 14.

[2]Address in the Presence of Religious Leaders(28 October 2025).

[3]Francis,Address to Participants in the 3rdWorld Meeting of Popular Movements(5 November 2016).

[4]Address to the Prefects of the Italian Republic(16 February 2026).

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See