ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER JOHN PAUL IITO THE ASSEMBLY OF NOBEL PEACE PRIZE LAUREATS*

Monday, 13 November 2000

Ladies and Gentlemen,

It gives me great pleasure to welcome this distinguished assembly of Nobel Peace Prize laureates at the conclusion of your Second International Forum. I greet in particular His Excellency Mr Mikhail Gorbachev, President of the International Foundation for Socio-Economic and Political Studies, and Mr Francesco Rutelli, Mayor of Rome.

Over the past few days you have been reflecting on the world situation at the dawn of a new millennium. Men and women everywhere look to the future in the hope of real and lasting peace, founded on a civilization which respects the rights of all and safeguards the authentic common good. Yet there are very great difficulties to be faced, as we continue to see, in many parts of the world, armed conflicts and terrible human tragedies.

At this significant moment in history, a concerted effort must be made to ensure that new generations reject the ways of discrimination, exclusion and conflict, and set out resolutely on the path to peace in a spirit of openness to the values and traditions of others. In close cooperation with the United Nations Organization, you have taken a lead in this regard by seeking to promote a culture of non-violence and peace among the children of the world during the coming decade. You have also recognized that a civilization of peace cannot be built without tackling the problem of external debt, and without a greater sense of responsibility among those who work in the area of social communications.

I encourage your efforts to build a better future for the peoples of the world, to ensure that all can live in peace and harmony, making use of their talents and gifts for their personal growth and for the good of society. I pray that God will bless you and your families, and guide you as you continue to dedicate yourselves to the cause of peace, reconciliation and harmony among all peoples.

*Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. XXIII, 2 pp.879-880.

L'Osservatore Romano13-14.11.2000 p.7.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn. 47 p.8.

© Copyright 2000 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See