POPE FRANCIS

MORNING MEDITATION IN THE CHAPEL OF THEDOMUS SANCTAE MARTHAE

Prayer works miracles

Monday, 20 May 2013

(byL'Osservatore Romano, Weekly ed. in English, n. 22, 29 May 2013)

Miracles still happen today. But in order to allow the Lord to carry them out we must pray with courage to overcome that “feeling of disbelief” that dwells in the heart of every man, even in men of faith. This was the recommendation of Pope Francis to those who took part the Mass celebrated Monday morning, 20 May, in the Chapel of the Domus Sanctae Marthae.

While reflecting on the Gospel Reading of the day (Mk 9:14-29), the Holy Father focused on the question the disciples asked as when they were unable to cast out the evil spirit from the boy: “Why could we not cast it out? This kind of demon, Jesus says, cannot be driven out by anything but prayer”. The father of the child “said: Lord I believe, help my unbelief”. His was “a strong prayer; and that prayer, humble and strong, moves Jesus to work the miracle. A prayer that calls for an extraordinary action”, said the Pope, “must be a prayer that involves all of us, as though our very life depends on it. In prayer, you have to put yourself to the test”.

“Miracles happen. But they need prayer! A courageous prayer, that struggles for that miracle. Not like those prayers of courtesy: Ah, I will pray for you! Followed by one Our Father, a Hail Mary and then I forget. No! It takes a brave prayer like that of Abraham who was struggling with the Lord to save the city, like that of Moses who prayed, his hands held high when he grew weary...”.

Prayer works miracles, Pope Francis ended, “but we must believe it. I think that we can say a beautiful prayer, not a polite prayer, but a prayer from the heart, and tell him today throughout the whole day: Lord, I believe! Help my unbelief”.

Among those present at Mass were a group of employees from Vatican Radio, led by director Fr Federico Lombardi, and the staff of the Office of Technology of the Governorate.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See