APOSTOLIC JOURNEY OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISTO MEXICO(12-18 FEBRUARY 2016)

VISIT TO THE CATHEDRAL OF MORELIA

REMARKS OF THE HOLY FATHERTO CHILDREN ATTENDING CATECHISM CLASSES

Tuesday, 16 February 2016

[Multimedia]

Sit down! Good afternoon! I know that you come from all the parishes of the city and from the suffragan dioceses and from several schools. Thank you for coming.

I will ask Jesus to make you grow up with much love, with much love, like that which he had. With much love in order to be real Christians, to keep the Commandment that Jesus gave us: to love God above all things and our neighbours as ourselves or even more, as Jesus loved them, as he loved us.

I also ask the Virgin to take care of us, to bless us. Above all, each of us now, think in our heart of our family and friends, and if we have quarrelled with someone, let us think of them too, and let us ask the Virgin to take care of them too: it is a way of making friends and not so many enemies, because life isn’t beautiful if we have enemies and it is God in our heart who makes us make friends.

So, silently, let us think of our families, of our friends, of those with whom we have quarrelled, so that God may bless them, and also bless all the people who help us — the nuns, the priests, professors and school teachers — all those who are helping us to develop. And also a special blessing for dad, mom and our grandparents. In silence, let us close our eyes and ask for all this. [Hail Mary....]

And I ask you to please pray for me. Will you do so? [They answer:Yes!] That’s right!

Turning to the choir who had dedicated a song to him, the Holy Father spoke the following words.

My compliments, really, very good. Art and sports expand the heart and help us to grow properly, with fresh air, and they do not restrict life. Continue to be creative, continue this way, seeking beauty, beautiful things, the things that last for ever, and never let anyone step on you. Is that clear? Shall I give you my blessing? [They respond:Yes!]

After the Apostolic Blessing, the Holy Father concluded:

Please, I ask you to pray for me, and every so often, to sing a song for me, even though I am far away. Goodbye! See you later! May God bless you.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See