VIDEO MESSAGE OF POPE LEO XIVON THE OCCASION OF SEEK26

[Columbus (Ohio), Denver (Colorado) e Fort Worth (Texas), 1-5 January 2026]

[Multimedia]

_________________________________

Dear friends,

It is a pleasure for me to greet all of you who are participating in the SEEK26 Conferences that are taking in place in Columbus, Denver and Fort Worth. You are gathered during the Christmas season, when some of the Gospel readings at Mass come from the first chapter of the Gospel of John. Towards the end of this chapter we learn something about the first two disciples of Jesus, one of whom was Andrew. They were disciples of John the Baptist, and after John referred to Jesus as the Lamb of God, they immediately started to follow Jesus (cf. v. 36). When Jesus saw them, he turned and uttered his first words that are recorded in John’s Gospel: “What do you seek?” (cf. v. 38).

Jesus asks the disciples this question because he knows their hearts. They were restless — in a good way. They did not want to settle for the normal routine of life. They were open to God and were longing for meaning. Today, Jesus directs this same question to each one of you. Dear young people, what do you seek? Why are you here at this conference? Perhaps your hearts are also restless, searching for meaning and fulfillment, and for direction in your lives. The answer is found in a person. The Lord Jesus alone brings us true peace and joy, and fulfills every one of our deepest desires.

The disciples respond by asking him where he was staying. It was not enough for someone else to tell them that Jesus is the Lamb of God; they wanted to get to know him personally by spending time with him. During this conference, you too will have the opportunity to spend time with the Lord. For some of you, like Andrew, it may be your first real encounter with Christ. For others, this weekend will be an opportunity to deepen your relationship with him as well as your understanding of the Catholic faith. Be open to what the Lord has in store for you!

The two disciples were initially with Jesus only for a few hours, but that encounter changed their lives forever. The first thing Andrew did afterwards was go and tell his brother Simon, “We found the Messiah” (cf. v. 41), in other words, “We have found the one we were looking for!” It is the answer that all of us can give once we too get to know the Lord. This passage also therefore speaks to us of what it means to be a missionary. After meeting Jesus, Andrew could not help but share with his brother what he had found. Indeed, missionary zeal is born from an encounter with Christ. We desire to share with others what we have received so that they, too, can come to know the fullness of love and truth found only in him. I pray that as you leave this conference, all of you will be moved by this same missionary zeal to share with those around you the joy that you have received from a genuine encounter with the Lord.

Dear young people, as you draw close to Jesus through this weekend, through fellowship, the sacraments and Eucharistic Adoration, do not be afraid to ask him what he is calling you to. Some of you, like Andrew and Simon Peter, may be called to the priesthood, to serve God’s people through the celebration of the sacraments, through preaching the word of God, walking with God’s people. Others may be called to religious life, to give yourselves entirely to God, others still may be called to marriage and family life. If you sense the Lord calling you, do not be afraid. Once again, let me emphasize that he alone knows the deepest, perhaps hidden, longings of your heart, and the path that will lead you to true fulfilment. Let him lead and guide you!

Since this conference begins on the Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God, let us ask her to lead us to Jesus Christ, her Son, so that we may truly come to know him, to know his love for us and the marvelous plan he has for each of our lives. In that way, our hearts will truly find rest in the one whom we are seeking.

Entrusting each of you to Our Lady’s maternal intercession, I gladly invoke upon all of you and upon your families the divine blessings of this Christmas season.

And may Almighty God bless all of you, the✠Father, and the✠Son, and the✠Holy Spirit. Amen.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See