ADDRESS OF JOHN PAUL IITO LLOYD THOMSONAMBASSADOR OF AUSTRALIAACCREDITED TO THE HOLY SEE*

Thursday, 26 June 1980

Mr Ambassador,I am happy to receive from Your Excellency the Letter accrediting you as the Australian Ambassador to the Holy See. I welcome you and I thank you for the kind words which you have addressed to me in your own name as well as on behalf of the Government and people of Australia.

The first concern of the Church is the spiritual well being of every person; and therefore she always directs her primary attention to the deepest longing of the human person, to the hunger of the soul for eternal life. Nevertheless, the other needs and longings of the human person are not forgotten.

For the Church, in her desire to remain faithful to the teaching and example of Jesus Christ, cannot remain indifferent to the hopes and joys, the needs and sufferings of the men and women of our day. Furthermore, through religious activities the Church can help individuals grow in commitment to those basic human values which are so important for any society or culture. At the same time those activities can assist in the establishment of unity and harmony among peoples and nations.

You have made reference to those concerns which Australia and the Holy See hold in common.

The Church notes with satisfaction the desire of your country to continue to contribute to the efforts of the international community aimed at ridding the world of poverty, violence, ignorance and disease, at fostering true justice and peace, and at promoting the fundamental dignity of every human being. In this regard I wish to express my sincere appreciation for all that your nation, faithful to its tradition of hospitality, has done and continues to do for the many immigrants and refugees whom you have welcomed to your shores. The Church desires to offer her moral support to these worthy endeavours.

I would request you kindly to convey my cordial greetings to the Government and people of Australia. I assure Your Excellency of the full cooperation of the Holy See in the fulfilment of your assignment and I extend my best wishes for the fruitful accomplishment of your mission.

*Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II,vol. III, 1 pp. 1844-1845.

L’Attività della Santa Sede1980 p. 445.

L'Osservatore Romano27.6.1980 pp.1, 2.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.26 p.18.

AAS 72 (1980), p. 639-640.

© Copyright 1980 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See