ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHERTO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF BANGLADESHTO THE HOLY SEE*

Friday, 12 July 1979

Mr Ambassador,

TODAY, AS YOU present your Letters of Credence as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh, I extend to you a cordial welcome to the Holy See.

I thank you for the greetings that you bring from the President and people of your country. And through you I reciprocate this thoughtful gesture in expectation of being able to greet your President personally.

I am also grateful for the kind words you have spoken about the Holy See’s concern for peace in the world. The question is indeed intimately linked to the other issues that you mentioned: poverty, social justice and spiritual values. In all these fields, and in others, the Catholic Church has pledged her contribution. As she pursues her spiritual mission, she is keenly aware of the nature of man in the fullness of his human condition, and of his multiple needs. In speaking in my Encyclical Letter of the Church’s solicitude I stated: "The object of her care is man in his unique unrepeatable human reality, which keeps intact the image and likeness of God himself".

The quest for human betterment in accord with the dignity of man is long and difficult. But the Church is intent on continuing her course under the sign of hope. Her activity finds expression at both the local level and the international level.

In Bangladesh itself the Catholic Church is engaged in various initiatives of service that benefit the people. Her charitable and educational undertakings are consonant with her commitment to generous and unselfish service. This aim, in turn, reflects the very constitution of the Church.

And from this centre of international activity, the Church endeavours to put all her energies at the service of humanity. What she does in the field of social justice, development and world peace is oriented to the concrete good of each people and of all the peoples of the earth. By the means proper to her she works to encourage and support the efforts being made throughout the world to enlist the grass-roots participation of everyone in the cause of human advancement. This support and encouragement and service find concrete expression also for Bangladesh and for all its citizens.

Be assured therefore, Mr Ambassador, as you begin your new diplomatic mission, of the understanding and cooperation of the Holy See. Be assured of my own personal good wishes. Be assured of my prayers.

*AAS 71 (1979), p. 1351-1352.

Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. II, 2 pp. 44-45.

L’Attività della Santa Sede1979 p. 494.

L'Osservatore Romano13.7.1979 pp.1, 2.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.32 p.5.

© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See