POPE FRANCIS

ANGELUS

Saint Peter's SquareSunday, 14 June 2020

[Multimedia]

Dear Brothers and Sisters, Good morning!

Today, in Italy and in other nations, theSolemnity of the Body and Blood of Christ,Corpus Christi, is being celebrated. In the second Reading of today’s liturgy, Saint Paul reawakens our faith in this mystery of communion (cf. 1 Cor 10:16-17). He highlights two effects of the shared chalice and the broken bread: themysticaleffect and thecommunaleffect.

First, the Apostle states: “The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not a participation in the blood of Christ? The bread which we break is it not a participation in the body of Christ?” (v. 16). These words express themysticaleffect, or we might say the spiritual effect of the Eucharist: it relates to the union with Christ, who in the bread and the wine offers himself for the salvation of all. Jesus is present in the sacrament of the Eucharist to be our nourishment, to be assimilated and to become in us that renewing force that gives once again the energy and gives once more the desire to set out again after every pause or after every fall. But this requires our consent, our willingness to let ourselves, our way of thinking and acting, be transformed. Otherwise the Eucharistic celebrations in which we participate are reduced to empty and formal rituals. Often some go to Mass because they have to go, as if it were a social event, respectful but social. However, the mystery is something else. It is Jesus who is present and comes to nourish us.

The second effect is thecommunalone, and is expressed by Saint Paul in these words: “Because there is one bread, we who are many are one body” (v. 17). It is the mutual communion of those who participate in the Eucharist, to the point of becoming one body among them, in the same way that the bread that is broken and distributed is one. We are a community nourished by the body and blood of Christ. We are a community, nourished by the body and blood of Christ. Communion with the body of Christ is an effective sign of unity, of communion, of sharing. One cannot participate in the Eucharist without committing oneself to mutual fraternity, which is sincere. But the Lord knows well that our human strength alone is not enough for this. On the contrary, He knows that among His disciples there will always be the temptation of rivalry, envy, prejudice, division... We are all aware of these things. For this reason too He left us the Sacrament of His real, tangible and permanent Presence, so that, in remaining united to him, we may always receive the gift of fraternal love. “Abide in my love” (Jn 15:9), Jesus said; and this is possible thanks to the Eucharist. To abide in friendship, in love.

This twofold fruit of the Eucharist: first, union with Christ and second, communion between those who are nourished by him, generates and continually renews the Christian community. It is the Church that makes the Eucharist, but it is more fundamental thatthe Eucharist makes the Church, and allows herto be her mission, even before she accomplishes it. This is the mystery of communion, of the Eucharist: receiving Jesus so He may transform us from within, and receiving Jesus so that He may create unity in us and not division.

May the Blessed Virgin help us to always welcome with wonder and gratitude the great gift that Jesus gave us by leaving us the Sacrament of His Body and His Blood.

After praying the Angelus the Holy Father turned his thoughts and prayers to the dramatic situation in Libya.

Dear brothers and sisters, I am following the dramatic situation in Libya with great apprehension and sorrow. It has been present in my prayer in recent days. Please, I urge international organizations and those who have political and military responsibilities to recommence with conviction and determination the search for a path towards an end to the violence, leading to peace, stability and the unity of the country. I also pray for the thousands of migrants, refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons in Libya. The health situation has aggravated their already precarious conditions, making them more vulnerable to forms of exploitation and violence. There is cruelty. I call on the international community to please take their plight to heart, identifying pathways and providing means to assure them the protection they need, a dignified condition and a hopeful future. Brothers and sisters, we all have responsibility for this; no one should feel exempt. Let us all pray for Libya in silence.

After the Angelus the Holy Father continued:

Today isWorld Blood Donor Day. It is an opportunity to encourage society to be supportive and sensitive to those in need. I greet the volunteers present and express my appreciation to all those who perform this simple but very important act of helping others: donating blood.

I greet you all, the faithful of Rome and pilgrims. I wish you, and all those connected via the media, a happy Sunday. Please do not forget to pray for me. Enjoy your lunch.Arrivederci.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See