APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO ZIMBABWE, BOTSWANA, LESOTHO,SWAZILAND AND MOZAMBIQUE

FAREWELL CEREMONY

ADDRESSOF JOHN PAUL II

International Airport of Gaborone, BotswanaWednesday, 14 September 1988

Your Excellency President Masire,Bishop Setlalekgosi,Dear Friends,

1. The time has come for me to take leave of your country. As I do so, I can assure you that it has been a great joy for me to make this pastoral visit. Since my arrival yesterday morning, I have accumulated manymemories of the land and people of Botswanathat I will treasure. You will always have a special place in the Pope’s heart and in his prayers.

I am gratified by thekindness, courtesy and affectionthat have accompanied me everywhere over the past twenty-four hours. I have been cordially welcomed by all those whom I have met, whether Catholics, fellow Christians, or members of other religions. I am confident thatthis experience of mutual respect and esteemtruly exemplifies the desire of all people of good will to live together in peace. May God bless all your efforts to create greater love and understanding in the world.

It has been my special joy to witness firsthand thevitality of the Catholic Churchin Botswana. In accord with Christ’s will, I came to confirm my brothers and sisters in their faith. I have been edified by their efforts to live the Gospel and to share it with others. The enthusiasm and commitment ofyoung people, in particular, is a source of encouragement for the future. Throughmutual loveand throughservice to others, may the clergy, religious and laity of Botswana always be a sign to their fellow citizens of God’s infinite love for mankind.

2. As I prepare to depart, I offerthanks to Almighty God, the Father of Mercies, for without his blessing all our labours are in vain. I thank the many people, especially the sick and the elderly, whoby their prayershave contributed to the spiritual preparation for this visit.

Mr President: I am grateful to you and to all the members of Government for the many courtesies extended to me, and for your personal kindness in welcoming me upon my arrival and at the State House. I also wish to thankBishop Setlalekgosifor receiving me as a brother in Christ and for offering me his gracious hospitality.

My gratitude also extends toall those in the Church and in Governmentwho so diligently prepared this visit: those who helped in planning the events, especially the liturgy; those who made ready the various sites; those responsible for security, good order and transport; and the representatives of the media who have made it possible for others around the world to share the joy of this visit. Nor may I fail to mention all those who came out to greet the Pope and to hear his words.May God bless all of you.

3. Dear friends: the Liturgy I celebrated yesterday spoke ofjustice and peace. It re-echoed the timeless message that justice and peace are both a giftofGodand a work of man. Without God we could never hope to understand, much less experience, the true nature of justice and peace. He offers them to us as gifts; we will find them only if we look to him. At the same time it is ourmoral duty as creaturesmade in God’s image and likeness to conform our lives to these divine gifts. Our world must be governed byloverather than hate,forgivenessrather than enmity,self-givingrather than selfishness,respectfor others rather than domination. Only in this way can we hope to enjoy the justice and peace for which humanity yearns.

As I leave your country, it is my hope and prayer that the people of Botswana will alwayschoose wiselythe paths that lie ahead. May thelove of God and of neighbourbe your guide. Maylove for justicebe your constant aim, so that you and your children’s children may continue to enjoy in this oasis of peace God’s specialgift of peace.

God bless all of you.God bless Botswana.

© Copyright 1988 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See