JUBILEE OF MERCY

VIDEO MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISTO BOYS AND GIRLS GATHERED IN ROME'S OLYMPIC STADIUMON THE OCCASION OF THEIR JUBILEE

23 April 2016

Dear Girls and Boys, Good evening!

You have gathered for a moment of celebration and joy. I was not able to come and I am sorry. I have decided to greet you with this video. I would have liked so much to come to the Stadium, but I was not able to do so....

I thank you for accepting the invitation to come to celebrate the Jubilee here in Rome. This morning you transformed St Peter’s Square into a great confessional and you passed through the Holy Door. Do not forget that the Door indicates the encounter with Christ, who introduces us to the Father’s love and asks us to become merciful, as He is merciful.

Tomorrow, then, we will celebrate Mass together. It was right that there also be a space to be together with joy and to hear some important testimonies, which can help you to grow in faith and in life.

I know that you have a bandana with the Corporal Works of Mercy written on it: place these works in your mind, because they are the way of Christian life. As you know, the Works of Mercy are simple gestures, which are part of everyday life, allowing us to recognize the Face of Jesus in the faces of many people. Even young people! Even young people like you, who are hungry, thirsty; who are refugees or sojourners or sick and who need our help, our friendship.

Being merciful means also being capable of forgiveness. This is not easy! It may happen that, at times, in the family, at school, in the parish, at the gym or in gathering places someone may do wrong and we may feel offended; or in a moment of irritability we might offend others. Let us not bear resentment or the desire for revenge! It serves no purpose: it is a worm that eats away at the soul and does not allow us to be happy. Let us forgive! Let us forgive and forget the harm done, so that we may understand Jesus’ teaching and be his disciples and witnesses of mercy.

Boys and girls, so often it happens that I must call friends, but I am unable to make contact because there is no signal. I am sure it also happens to you, that in some places your mobile phone does not connect.... Well, remember that if Jesus is not in your life, it is as if there is no signal! We are not able to speak and we become closed off within ourselves. Let us always be where there is signal! The family, the parish, school, so that in this world we will always have something good and true to say.

Now I bid you all farewell, I hope you experience this moment with joy and I look forward to seeing you all tomorrow in St Peter’s Square.Ciao!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See