LETTER OF THE HOLY FATHER JOHN PAUL IITOTHE BISHOPS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

To my dear Brothers the Bishopsof the United States of America

Within the framework of my 1987 Pastoral Visit to the United States and of your recentad Liminavisits to Rome, I indicated on several occasions my desire to meet again with the United States Hierarchy after these very important events in the life of the Church in the United States had been completed.

Being aware of your keen interest in such an initiative and of your readiness to come to Rome for this purpose, I have set aside the period March 8 to 11 for a meeting between your representatives and myself, together with the Heads of the concerned Dicasteries of the Holy See.

After consultations with the leadership of the NCCB and with the US Cardinals in active ministry, the following theme has been chosen for our meeting: “Evangelization in the context of the culture and society of the United States, with particular emphasis on the role of the Bishop as the Teacher of Faith”.

As indicated in my address last year to Region V: “...it is my intention to reflect with you onan organic pastoral viewof our Episcopal ministry. This organic view must take into account the perennial exigencies of the Gospel; it must also express the indisputable priorities of the life of the Church today, both in her universal needs and in the special requirements of the Church in the United States. At the same time it must faithfully reflectthe call of the Second Vatican Council to reform and renewalas reiterated by the Bishop of Rome and the worldwide episcopate in communion with him” (Ioannis Pauli PP. IIAd quosdam episcopas Foederatarum Civitatum Americae Septemtrionalis limina Apostolorum visitantes, 1, die 31 maii 1988:Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, XI, 1(1988) 1696).

Details concerning the agenda and procedure of the meeting are being worked out by the Congregation for Bishops, which will be in contact with you through the Apostolic Nunciature in Washington.

In anticipation of this forthcoming fraternal encounter, I express once again my deep affection in the Lord Jesus and I gladly impart my Apostolic Blessing.

From the Vatican, January 10, 1989.

IOANNES PAULUS PP. II

© Copyright 1989 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See