APOSTOLIC JOURNEY OF POPE LEO XIVTO ALGERIA, CAMEROON, ANGOLA AND EQUATORIAL GUINEA(13–23 April 2026)

VISIT TO BATA PRISON

GREETING OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIV

BataWednesday, 22 April 2026

[Multimedia]

_____________________________

Dear brothers and sisters,

In some places, it is said that rain is a sign of God’s blessing. Let us pray that this may indeed be the case. And let us also live this moment as a sign of God’s closeness, a God who never abandons us.

I have listened carefully to your words. Thank you for your sincerity, and for showing us that human dignity and hope are never lost, even in the midst of difficulties.

Today, I am here to tell you something simple: no one is excluded from God’s love! Each of us, with our unique stories, mistakes and sufferings, remains precious in the Lord’s eyes. We can say this with certainty, because Jesus revealed it to us in every encounter, every gesture and every word. Even when he was arrested, condemned and put to death through no fault of his own, he loved us to the very end. In doing so, he showed us that he believed in the power of love to change even the hardest of hearts.

On this journey, I have experienced Equatorial Guinea as a land rich in cultures, languages and traditions. Your families, communities and faith are a great source of strength for this nation. You, too, are also part of this country. The administration of justice aims to protect society. To be effective, however, it must always promote the dignity and potential of every person. True justice seeks not so much to punish as to help rebuild the lives of victims, offenders and communities wounded by evil. There is no justice without reconciliation. This is an immense undertaking. Part of it can happen within prisons, but the greater part must involve the entire national community, in order to prevent and heal the wounds caused by injustice.

Above all, I would like to speak to you about hope and change. Although prison may seem like a lonely and desolate place, as has been said, it can also become a space for reflection, reconciliation and personal growth. Every effort should be made to ensure that you are given the opportunity to study and to work with dignity while in prison. Life is not defined solely by one’s mistakes, which are often the result of difficult and complex circumstances. There is always the possibility to start over, learn and become a new person.

Brothers and sisters, you are not alone. Your families love you and are waiting for you. Many people outside these walls are praying for you. If any of you fear being abandoned by everyone, know that God will never abandon you, and that the Church will stand by your side. Think of your country and the young people of Equatorial Guinea who need examples of perseverance, responsibility and faith. Every effort toward reconciliation and every act of kindness can spark hope in others.

I would also like to thank the people who work at this correctional facility:the director, the officers and the chaplain. By combining security with respect and kindness, they provide an essential service that ensures the necessary conditions that allow inmates to reintegrate into society and rebuild their lives.

Dear brothers and sisters, God never grows tired of forgiving. He always opens a new door for those who recognize their mistakes and desire to change. Do not let the past rob you of hope for the future. Every day can be a new beginning.

Let us entrust this journey to the Virgin Mary, Mother of Mercy. May she accompany you, console you and protect your families. Today, I wish to assure you of my closeness and of my prayers for you and all the people of Equatorial Guinea. Always remember that a person who gets back up after falling is stronger than before. May the Lord grant you peace, hope and strength to begin anew.

Brothers and sisters, under this rain, which is a blessing from God, let us recite the prayer that Christ himself taught us, saying: Our Father ….

And may Almighty God bless you, the Father, Son and the Holy Spirit.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See