VISIT OF THE HOLY FATHER FRANCISTO THE EARTHQUAKE-AFFECTED AREASOF THE DIOCESE OF CAMERINO-SAN SEVERINO MARCHE

POPE FRANCIS

ANGELUS

Trinity Sunday, 16 June 2019

[Multimedia]

Yesterday, Edvige Carboni, a simple woman of the people who embraced the Cross in her humble everyday life, bearing witness to faith and charity, was beatified in Pozzomaggiore, Sardinia. Let us give thanks for this faithful disciple of Christ who spent her entire life at the service of God and of others. A round of applause for the newly Blessed, everyone!

We wish to remember refugees in a special way on the World Day that the United Nations dedicates to them. This occurrence invites everyone to solidarity with men, women and children fleeing war, persecution and violations of fundamental human rights. May our ecclesial and civil communities be close to them and attentive to their needs and their suffering.

I am also following with concern the escalation of tensions in the Persian Gulf. I invite everyone to make use of the tools of diplomacy to resolve the complex problems of conflict in the Middle East. I also renew my heartfelt appeal to the international community to make every possible effort to promote dialogue and peace.

At the end of this celebration, I cordially greet all of you present here. I offer an affectionate greeting to the sick, the elderly, the imprisoned and all those who are spiritually united to this Holy Mass via radio and television. I offer my heartfelt gratitude to those — institutions, entities, associations and individual persons — who have worked for this short but intense visit of mine, generously collaborating with the Archdiocese of Camerino - San Severino Marche. I also wish to offer a special greeting and encouragement to the inhabitants of San Severino Marche, whom I will greet from above as I fly over their city by helicopter.

Dear brothers and sisters, may you joyfully walk in unity on the path of faith, hope and charity, faithful to the many witnesses of holiness whom your land has in abundance. I am thinking among others of Saint Venantius, Saint Severinus, Saint Ansovinus, Saint Nicholas of Tolentino, Saint Pacific and Saint Battista Varano. I am also thinking of the many examples of “saints next door” who have not been beatified or canonized, but who have supported — and do support — and have transformed families and communities through the strength of their Christian life.

And now let us recite theAngelusprayer. I entrust the entire diocesan community to the Blessed Virgin whom you worship in many Shrines and invoke particularly with the titleSanta Maria in Via. May she who enlivened the first community of Jesus’ disciples with her maternal presence, also help today’s Church bear good witness to the Gospel.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See