ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESSPOPE JOHN PAUL IITO THE MEMBERS OF THE PAPAL FOUNDATION

8 April 1997

Your Eminences,Your Excellencies,Dear Friends in Christ,

It is always a pleasure for me to greet the members ofThe Papal Foundation, on what has become a traditional yearly visit to Rome. Close to the tomb of the Apostle Peter we are at one with the whole Church in the great hymn of praise which we raise to the Father during this Easter Season in thanksgiving for the resurrection of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Through the Foundation you express a special oneness with the Successor of Peter, the visible foundation of the Church's unity and peace. You are truly close to my heart and present in my prayers.

This year, in preparation for the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000, the whole Church has been called to reflect on Christ, the Word of God, made man by the power of the Holy Spirit (cf.Tertio Millennio Adveniente,40). As Christians, our actions should always manifest the presence in our lives of the mystery of salvation into which we have been incorporated through Baptism. In union of mind and heart with the Lord we must strive to live in a Christ-like fashion: "As many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ" (Gal3:27). There is no greater grace that I could invoke upon you than this: that your faith be strengthened and your love be renewed.

The Papal Foundation is a work of faith and love. It means supporting the Pope's ministry and the works which the Apostolic See wishes to promote in different parts of the world at the service of the Gospel. I thank you for your generosity and for the tireless efforts that have gone into bringing you ever closer to achieving the Foundation's goals.

May Mary, Mother of the Redeemer, intercede for you and your families and for all who support the Foundation. As a pledge of the grace which flows from fidelity to Christ and his Church, I cordially impart my Apostolic Blessing.

© Copyright 1997 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See