ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS PIUS XIITO THE UNITED STATES AMBASSADORMYRON C. TAYLOR*

Tuesday, 20 April 1948

His Excellency, Mr. Taylor, has just told Us of your desire to be received by Us, and We hasten to assure you of a very hearty welcome to Rome and to Our own Vatican City State.

You have just witnessed the passing of a day, that will be memorable in the annals of Italian history. An entire people has given proof of its grave sense of civic duty, and the skies of Italy are brighter with hope of that tranquillity of order, which will make possible and should hasten the material and social re-construction of the country, so necessary if justice is to be done to all, especially the working-man and the unemployed.

But that day has also quickened the confidence of all Europe, yes and the whole world. Messages reaching Us from every continent tell Us how Our children with one accord and spontaneously have turned at this crucial moment to the Infinite God, Ruler of all nations, with a prayer, that He come to the defense of His cause against error and injustice. To Him like-wise Our own paternal heart turns, saddened by the spectacle of so many, who in their egoism or blindness stubbornly hold to the path that can lead only to disaster for soul and body alike.

May He in His mercy and love illumine their minds, so that they may see the error of their way. May He drive from the face of the earth the spectre of distrust or, what is worse, of conflict. May He grant, if only men will humbly recognize His desire to help them! — may He grant that a generous and fraternal cooperation between all nations may yet bring true peace, make it secure and lasting.

We pray also that heaven's choicest blessings may descend on you and your dear ones and remain forever.

*Discorsi e Radiomessaggi di Sua Santità Pio XII, X,Decimo anno di Pontificato, 2 marzo 1948- 1° marzo 1949, p. 63Tipografia Poliglotta Vaticana.

L’Osservatore Romano24.4.1948, p.1.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See