PASTORAL VISIT TO THE ROMAN PARISH OF«DIO PADRE MISERICORDIOSO»

ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVITO THE PASTORAL WORKERS OF THE COMMUNITYAT THE END OF THE MASS

Parish HallIV Sunday of Lent, 26 March 2006

Dear Parish Priest,Dear Friends,

I see that you really are a living parish where you all collaborate, where you bear each other's burdens - as St Paul says - and thus contribute to the growth of the living building of the Lord, which is the Church.

She is not made of material stones but of living stones, of baptized people who feel the full responsibility of the faith for others, the full joy of being baptized and knowing God in the face of Jesus. Consequently, you are striving to ensure that this parish can truly grow.

We are approaching Easter and the two aspects of Christian life appear to us:  one part constitutes an ascent, a climb that can also be somewhat difficult; the other part is always bathed in the light of God, in the light of Our Lord.

I would simply like to say thank you for your commitment. To see in a parish so many active people who visit the sick, who help those in difficulty, who collaborate with the parish priest, who see that there is a good celebration of the liturgy, is a joy to the Bishop of Rome, who I am, even if it is the Cardinal Vicar who sees to the specific actions.

However, I feel this responsibility and I am truly glad to see that Rome, "old Rome", is a "young Rome" and truly alive in vibrant parishes.

The faith must be carried forward because outside Italy, people often think that there is nothing in Rome but ecclesiastical ceremonies and bureaucracy with little ecclesial life, which, on the contrary, is visible precisely in the suburbs of Rome.

Rome is young, the Church is always young again. It is lovely for me to see this participation, and I can only say "thank you" to you and encourage you to persevere under the guidance of your parish priest.

And from this moment, a happy Easter to you all.

© Copyright 2006 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See