ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVITO PARTICIPANTS IN THE INTERNATIONAL CONGRESSPROMOTED BY THEPUERI CANTORESFEDERATION

Paul VI Audience HallThursday, 30 December 2010

Dear young members of thePueri CantoresFederation,Dear Friends,

I am pleased to welcome you today as you celebrate your thirty-sixth International Congress here in Rome, and I thank you for your commitment to the apostolate of liturgical singing. In Saint Augustine’s words: “singing is an expression of joy and … love” (Sermo34:1). As you tell out God’s praises, you give voice to the natural desire of every human being to glorify him with songs of love. It is hard to find words to convey the joy of the soul’s loving encounter with God, yet fine music is able to express something of the mystery of his love for us and ours for him, as we are reminded by the theme chosen for your Congress:Deus Caritas Est.

Always remember that your singing is a service. It is a service to God, offering him the praise that is due. It is a service to other worshippers, helping them raise their hearts and minds in prayer. And it is a service to the whole Church, a foretaste of the heavenly liturgy in which the choirs of angels and saints unite in one unending song of love and praise.

I greet especially the groups present today from the United States, Sweden, Ireland, Latvia and South Korea. I encourage you to persevere in your good work, I assure you of my prayers, and I gladly impart to you and to all the members of thePueri CantoresFederation my Apostolic Blessing.

Un affettuoso saluto aiPueri Cantoresdi lingua italiana! Cari giovani amici, ringrazio voi e coloro che vi istruiscono nel canto sacro, per il prezioso servizio che svolgete nella Liturgia. Vi incoraggio tutti a perseverare e vi invito a sentirvi sempre partecipi della vita delle comunità cristiane a cui appartenete. Custodite la gioia che la venuta di Gesù porta con sé e scoprite sempre più quanto Egli vi voglia bene. Vi benedico tutti!

Je suis heureux de saluer très cordialement lesPueri Cantoresde langue française, venant de Belgique, de République démocratique du Congo et de France. Par la beauté de vos chants, vous manifestez à Dieu votre joie et votre amour, et vous aidez le peuple chrétien à entrer plus profondément dans les mystères célébrés au cours de la Liturgie. Je vous en remercie vivement. Que le chant liturgique, par lequel vous exprimez la grandeur et l’amour de Dieu, vous permette de grandir en sainteté! Que Dieu vous bénisse!

Ganz herzlich grüße ich diePueri Cantoresaus den Ländern deutscher Sprache. Das Evangelium der Heiligen Nacht berichtet vom Lobpreis der Engel, den die Hirten auf dem Feld bei Betlehem gehört haben. Immer schon haben Christen diesen Spruch der Engel als ein Lied aufgefaßt und sich dadurch anregen lassen, ihrerseits Gott mit Musik zu ehren. Auch ihr nehmt mit eurem Gesang an diesem schönen Auftrag teil, damit Gott verherrlicht werde und die Menschen Freude finden. Für euren Einsatz danke ich euch, liebe Jugendliche, und wünsche euch den weihnachtlichen Frieden und die Gnade Jesu Christi.

Saludo con afecto a losPueri Cantoresde lengua española. Con vuestro canto contribuís a que el pueblo cristiano contemple con más profundidad el misterio de Cristo, celebrado en la liturgia. Que el amor de Jesús recién nacido llene vuestros corazones de alegría y de paz. Que Dios os bendiga a vosotros y a vuestras familias.

A minha afectuosa saudação também para os «Pequenos Cantores» vindos de Portugal. Agradeço-vos o precioso serviço que realizais, animando com o canto as celebrações litúrgicas.

Serdeczne pozdrowienie kieruję doPueri Cantoresz Polski. Dziękuję wam za cenną posługę, jaką pełnicie, ożywiając śpiewem celebracje liturgiczne. W ten sposób pomagacie innym wielbić i chwalić Pana.

[Un affettuoso saluto aiPueri Cantoresvenuti dalla Polonia. Grazie per il prezioso servizio che svolgete animando con il canto le celebrazioni liturgiche e aiutando, così, a lodare e ringraziare il Signore!]

Складаю щирі вітання колективам-учасникам «Pueri Cantores» з України. Дякую вам за цінне служіння, яке ви виконуєте, супроводжуючи співом літургічні відправи.

[Un affettuoso saluto aiPueri Cantoresvenuti dall’Ucraina. Vi ringrazio per il prezioso servizio che svolgete animando con il canto le celebrazioni liturgiche!]

© Copyright 2010 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See