MEETING OFHIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVIWITH THE MEMBERS OF 'ZNACK'A POLISH PUBLISHING HOUSE

Saturday, 8 April 2006

Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen,

Thank you for coming and for the words that have just been addressed to me. I remember our previous meetings and I am glad to offer you hospitality here.

You represent the atmosphere that has existed around the ZNAK Publishing House for years. I know that its scope is not limited to activities connected with the publication of books, but includes the promotion of Christian culture, meant in the broad sense, and charitable initiatives. It makes a valuable contribution to the formation of the spiritual face of Krakow, of Poland and of the Church.I would like to take this opportunity to thank your Publishing House for publishing my books in Polish. I am grateful for the accuracy with which these texts have been prepared for printing.

Your visit to Rome is connected with the anniversary of my great Predecessor, John Paul II. I know that he already took a particular interest in ZNAK when he was Bishop of Krakow. He kept in contact with this establishment even when divine Providence called him to the See of Peter.

He always appreciated the active participation of lay people in the Church's life and supported their timely initiatives. It was not by chance that he entrusted his last book,Memory and Identity,to your Publishing House.He thankfully received the first copies while he was in the Gemelli Polyclinic, shortly before his departure to the Father's House.

I am certain that his patronage still lives on and that he is imploring God's Blessing and graces for you.

I ask you to remain faithful to Christ and to the Church - in honour of his memory. May your zeal in spreading culture based on eternal values never be extinguished!

Once again, I thank you for your visit and bless you with all my heart:  in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

© Copyright 2006 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See