ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHERTO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF PAKISTANTO THE HOLY SEE*

Friday, 30 March 1979

Mr Ambassador,

THE GREETINGS that you bring me from His Excellency President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq and the people of Pakistan are much appreciated. I am grateful also for your words about the recognition that the Catholic Church in your country has won for her response to her vocation to work for the betterment of human life.

The Church, as Your Excellency knows, considers it her duty to contribute to the fulfilment of man’s capabilities. The supreme and essential fulfilment lies in man’s relationship with God, in accepting and carrying out the design of his Creator. This design involves many capabilities granted to man for the development of his personal life and tris relations with others.

The Church therefore feels that she is doing no more than her God-given duty when she plays her part in helping to ensure for human beings everywhere the good health, nourishment and shelter needed for their bodily welfare, and the education, culture and freedom required for the development of their mental faculties, and when she strives to advance the reign of justice, peace and friendship between individuals and groups. All this she sees as part of her mission of working to establish right relationships on the part of human beings with God, in whom we live and move and have our being.

Your Excellency may therefore be confident that the Church will continue to co-operate with the striving of the people of Pakistan for a better way of life and for understanding, harmony and peace. I pray that the Almighty will guide and assist your fellow-citizens and their leaders in this endeavour. It is an endeavour to which the exigencies of human dignity call, and one that, if worthily pursued’ cannot fail to receive the blessing of God.

I ask God also to bestow his favours on Your Excellency and your important mission at the service of your country and of humanity, for the fulfilment of which you can count on my willing collaboration and that of the Holy See.

*Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. II, 1979 pp.743-744.

L’Attività della Santa Sede1979 p. 215.

L'Osservatore Romano31.3.1979 p.1.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.15 p.9.

© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See