POPE LEO XIV

ANGELUS

St Peter's SquareSunday, 1stFebruary 2026

[Multimedia]

___________________________________

Dear brothers and sisters, happy Sunday!

Today’s liturgy proclaims a beautiful passage from the Good News that Jesus announces to all humanity: the Gospel of the Beatitudes (Mt5:1-12). These are, in fact, lights that the Lord kindles in the darkness of history, revealing the plan of salvation that the Father accomplishes through the Son, with the power of the Holy Spirit.

On the mountain, Christ gives his disciples the new law, no longer written on stone. It is a law that renews our lives and makes them good, even when the world seems to have failed us and is full of misery. Only God can truly call the poor and afflicted blessed (cf. vv.3-4), because he is the highest good who gives himself to all with infinite love. Only God can satisfy those who seek peace and justice (cf. vv. 6.9), because he is the just judge of the world and the author of eternal peace. Only in God do the meek, the merciful and the pure of heart find joy (vv. 5.7-8), because he is the fulfilment of their expectations. In persecution, God is the source of redemption; in falsehood, he is the anchor of truth. Therefore, Jesus proclaims: “Rejoice and be glad!” (v. 12).

These Beatitudes remain a paradox only for those who believe that God is other than how Christ reveals him. Those who expect the arrogant to always rule the earth are surprised by the Lord’s words. Those who are accustomed to thinking that happiness belongs to the rich may believe that Jesus is deluded. However, the delusion lies precisely in the lack of faith in Christ. He is the poor man who shares his life with everyone, the meek man who perseveres in suffering, the peacemaker persecuted to death on the cross.

In this way, Jesus illuminates the meaning of history. It is no longer written by conquerors, but rather by God, who is able to accomplish it by saving the oppressed. The Son looks at the world through the Father’s love. On the other hand, asPope Francissaid, there are “the experts in illusion. We should not follow them because they are unable to give us hope” (Angelus, 17 February 2019). Instead, God gives this hope primarily to those whom the world dismisses as hopeless.

Therefore, dear brothers and sisters, the Beatitudes become for us a measure of happiness, leading us to ask whether we consider it an achievement to be bought or a gift to be shared; whether we place it in objects that are consumed or in relationships that accompany us. It is in fact because of Christ (cf.Mt5:11) and thanks to him that the bitterness of trials is transformed into the joy of the redeemed. Jesus does not speak of a distant consolation, but of a constant grace that always sustains us, especially in times of affliction.

The Beatitudes lift up the humble and disperse the proud in their inmost thoughts (cfLk1:51). Therefore, we ask for the intercession of the Virgin Mary, servant of the Lord, whom all generations call blessed.

_________________

After the Angelus

Dear brothers and sisters,

I have received the greatly troubling news regarding an increase in tensions between Cuba and the United States of America, two neighboring countries. I echo the message of the Cuban bishops, inviting all responsible parties to promote a sincere and effective dialogue, in order to avoid violence and every action that could increase the suffering of the dear Cuban people. May theVirgen de la Caridad del Cobreassist and protect all of the children of that beloved land!

Next Friday, the Milan-Cortina Winter Olympic Games will begin, followed by the Paralympic Games. I extend my best wishes to the organizers and all the athletes. These great sporting events send a powerful message of fraternity and rekindle hope for a world at peace. This is also the meaning of the Olympic truce, an ancient custom that accompanies the Games. I hope that all those who care about peace among peoples and are in positions of authority will take this opportunity to make concrete gestures of détente and dialogue.

Today in Italy is the “National Day for Civilian Victims of War and Conflict around the World.” Unfortunately this initiative is still tragically relevant. Every day there are more civilian victims of armed actions, actions that openly violate morality and the law. The dead and wounded of yesterday and today will truly be honored when this intolerable injustice comes to an end.

I assure you of my prayers for the dead and for those who are suffering as a result of the storms that have struck Portugal and southern Italy in recent days. Let us also not forget the people of Mozambique who have been severely affected by flooding.

I greet all of you, dear Romans and pilgrims from various countries!

In particular, I am pleased to welcome the members of the Luce-Vita movement of the Diocese of Siedlce, Poland, accompanied by their Auxiliary Bishop. I greet the groups of faithful from Paraná in Argentina, from Chojnice, Warsaw, Wrocław, and Wagrowiec in Poland, from Pula and Sinj in Croatia, from Guatemala City and San Salvador, as well as the students from the Rodríguez Moñino Institute in Badajoz and those from Cuenca, Spain. I also greet the devotees of Our Lady of Miracles of Corbetta, near Milan.

I thank you from my heart for your prayers and wish everyone a happy Sunday!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See