APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO POLAND

MEETING WITH THE FAITHFUL GATHERED IN WAWEL CATHEDRALAT THE TOMB OF SAINT STANISLAUS

ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II

Krakow,Wednesday, 6 June 1979

After arriving in Krakow, I have directed my first stepsto the Cathedral,in order to meet you who were waiting here at the tomb of Saint Stanislaus, of the blessed Queen Hedwig, and of our kings, of our military commanders, and of our inspired national poets. You all know very wellwhat this Wawelcathedral has been and is for me.

I greet the whole of the well-loved presbyterium of the Church of Krakow, gathered around the relics of its Patron, its Bishop of nine centuries ago, and also his successor of the present day, the Metropolitan of Krakow, and his brothers in the Episcopate.

I greet you all.

Since 1972 I prepared, together with you, my dear Brothers, this Jubilee that I am now celebrating with you, although it is in a way different from what I expected. Inscrutable are the designs of God! Inscrutable his ways!

We planned together that during this yearvisits should be made in all the parishesof the Archdiocese of Krakow with the relics of Saint Stanislaus, and I know that this plan is being carried out. I would like to add to this series of visits my own present visit in the Wawel basilica, which, as the Cathedral, is the mother church of all the churches and parishes of the Archdiocese. Through my visit to the holy relics here in the Cathedral I amindirectly visiting every parish.In this way I am also visiting each one of you, dear brothers and sons, each one in his place of work. I am visiting all the communities of the People of God of which you are the pastors. Please greet for me your parishes, your churches, your chapels. Greet all the shrines, which are always so dear to my heart.

Greet the families, the parents, the young people.

Now, as then, I pray every day for my beloved Archdiocese:for the families;for the parishes and deaneries;for the Religious Congregations of men and women;'for the Krakow Seminary and all the Seminaries situated in the City;for the Theological Athenaeum, heir to the most ancient Faculty in Poland, belonging to the Jagellonian University, which we owe to the Blessed Queen Hedwig;for the Council of Priests;for the Metropolitan Chancery;for the Chapter responsible for the care of Wawel;for the Synod of the Archdiocese and metropolis.

Blessed be the Godand Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with the gift of a special unity in his service. Amen.

© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See