ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE PAUL VITO THE NATO DEFENCE COLLEGE*

Saturday, 11 July 1970

General, Gentlemen and dear Sons,

At the end of the 36th session of the N.A.T.O Defence College, participants are about to disperse and return to their beloved countries, to Turkey, Europe and America. You have desired to come to Us to spend a few moments here in order to receive Our witness and Our Blessing. You are welcome. We have the pleasure on this occasion of receiving your Commandant, General Sefik Erensù, before he leaves Rome. With him and his assistants you have just been enjoying the benefit, We think, of a period of great interest for you. You have been able to acquire additional technical training in keeping with the demands of the times, but you have also lived an experience of solidarity which goes beyond frontiers.

The NATO Organization has shown that it is able to establish and maintain international collaboration for the purpose of assuring the security and peace of member countries.

We know that there can be no liberty and peace if there be no security. We likewise hope that this solidarity may widen and, deepen, not only the defence but also the positive building up of peace, in the sincere search for understanding among peoples, and in safeguarding the rights of oppressed or threatened populations. May it help to find just solutions in faithful respect for the interests of all, and above all, may it enable nations to devote their strength to promoting development of the means of living, cultural resources and spiritual values, once those nations have been liberated by truly international defence and pacts from the yoke of fears the armaments race and fratricidal war.

May you, dear Gentlemen, be guarantors and servants of such a project, which is so much in accord with Christ's message and men’s happiness.

It is with such thoughts and feelings that We wholeheartedly call down the Blessings of the Almighty upon each one of you, on your families and upon your dear ones.

*ORa n.30 p.12.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See