PRAYER OF THE HOLY FATHERFOR THE SOLEMNITY OF THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTIONOF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY

Wednesday 8 December 1999

As we do every year on this dayso dear to the Christian people,we are gathered here, in the heart of the city,to offer once again our traditional floral tributeto the Blessed Virgin, at the foot of the columnwhich Romans raised in honourof her Immaculate Conception.

Today's celebration, on the eve of the Great Jubilee,is a special preparation for our encounterwith Christ,"who abolished deathand brought life and immortality to lightthrough the Gospel" (2Tm1: 10).

This is how Scripture presents the saving missionof the Son of God.The Blessed Virgin, whom we contemplatetoday in the mystery of the Immaculate Conception,invites us to turn our gaze to the Redeemer,born in the poverty of Bethlehem for our salvation.

Let us contemplate with her the giftof the incarnation of God's Son, whocame among us to give meaning to human history.

May the prophet Isaiah's words echo in our hearts:"The people who walked in darknesshave seen a great light" (9: 2).

Mary is the radiant dawn of this day of sure hope.Mary is the Mother of Christ, who became manto inaugurate the new times foretold by the prophets.ith Mary, the "dawn of Redemption",we are observing Advent, a time of joyousexpectation, contemplation and hope.

Just as the rising of the sun is foretoldin the heavens by the morning star,so theincarnation of the Son of God,"the Dayspring" (Lk1: 78),is precededby the immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary.

It is a sublime mystery of grace,which we sense even more deeply this year,at the end of a millenniumand the imminent beginning of the Jubilee Year.

Today we have hastened with deeper trustto the Blessed Virgin's feet, asking her to help uscross, with renewed commitment, the thresholdof the Holy Door, which will lead usinto the Great Jubilee of the Year 2000.

He will cross this thresholdwith full awareness, supported and encouragedby your help, O Immaculate Virgin.

Two thousand years ago in Bethlehem of Judea,you gave birth to the Conqueror of deathand the Author of life, who through the Gospelmade all human life resplendent.

Christ came among us to restore full dignityto man created in God's image.Yes, human beings cannot remain in darkness;they yearn for the true Light to illuminetheir steps on this earthly pilgrimage.

Man does not love death:endowed with a spiritual nature, he yearnsfor the immortality of his whole being.

Jesus destroyed the power of death by his bloodand made it possible for this deep longingof the human heart to be satisfied.

As we look to you, Virgin chosenand full of grace, we pilgrims on earthsee the promise of immortality fulfilledin complete communion with God.

The Apostle's words are fulfilled in you,Mother of the living, as the first-fruits of glory:the Lord Jesus "abolished deathand brought life and immortality to light".

This year too, on the thresholdof a new millennium, the Churchrepeats this joyful message.

This is why today we come once againto your feet, Immaculate Virgin full of Grace,to implore you, who have become the voiceof the entire Christian people, to accept our tribute,the expression of our faith and devotion,as, with deep gratitude, we pass onto the next millennium the beautiful traditionof this devout meeting with youat the column in Piazza di Spagna.

And you, Immaculate Virgin Mary, pray for us!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See