APOSTOLIC JOURNEY OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISTO INDONESIA,PAPUA NEW GUINEA,TIMOR-LESTE AND SINGAPORE(2-13 September 2024)

VISIT TO THE CHILDREN OF STREET MINISTRY AND CALLAN SERVICES

GREETING OF HIS HOLINESS

“Caritas Technical Secondary School” (Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea)Saturday, 7 September 2024

[Multimedia]

___________________________

Well done, you who sang and danced. You do this very well!

Dear sisters and brothers, good evening!

I greet His Eminence, whom I thank for his words, the Superior of the Community, the Director, all those present, laity and religious, and especially you children, who are wonderful!

I am very happy to meet you and share this moment of celebration with you. I also thank your companions, who asked me two challenging questions.

One of you asked me: “Why am I not like other people?”. I really only have one answer to this question and that is: “None of us is like anyone else, because we are all unique in God’s eyes!”. It is not only that “there is hope for everyone” – as has been said – but I would add that each one of us has a role and mission in the world that no one else can fulfil. Even if it involves difficulties, carrying out our role and mission will also give us a great deal of joy in ways that are different for each person. Peace and joy are for everyone.

True, we all have limitations. There are some things we are good at doing. There are things we struggle with or can never do. This, however, should not determine our happiness, which comes instead from the love we put into whatever we do, give and receive. The most beautiful and important thing in our lives is always to love, and to welcome with open arms the love we receive from the people who love us. This is so for each person no matter how or where they find themselves. Did you know that this is also true for the Pope? Our joy does not depend on anything else; our joy depends on love!

This brings us to the second question: “How can we make our world more beautiful and happy?” For sure, with the same “recipe” of learning day by day to love God and others with all our hearts! We can also do it by trying to learn – even at school – all that we can, and to do so in the best way possible through studying and putting our best effort into every opportunity we are given to grow, improve and refine our gifts and skills.

Have you ever seen how a cat prepares itself when it has to make a big jump? First, it concentrates on directing all its strength and muscles in the right direction. Maybe this happens quickly and we do not even notice, but the cat does it. We can do the same by focusing all our strength on our goal, which is love of Jesus and, in him, for all the brothers and sisters we meet on the way. And then with new energy we can help everything and everyone to be filled with love! In this sense, none of us is “burdensome”. We are all beautiful gifts from God, a treasure for one another, as you all have reminded us!

Thank you, children, thank you very much for this meeting. Thank you all who work together in this place with love. Always keep this light of love burning. It is a sign of hope not only for you, but for all those you meet, and for our world, which is sometimes so selfish and preoccupied with things that do not matter. Keep the light of love burning! And, please, pray for me too!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See