MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IION THE OCCASION OF THE 2nd WORLD FOOD DAY*On the occasion of the observance of World Food Day 1982, I wish to express to you my full and wholehearted support of the Food and Agriculture Organization in its unremitting efforts to alleviate hunger and malnutrition.The struggle to remedy these ills which deeply affect immense numbers of our brothers and sisters deserves the active solidarity of all nations and all men and women of good will.It is my hope that the attention of the world will once again be directed to the urgency of feeding all the members of the human family.In praising all those who work perseveringly to improve food supplies and to assist farmers, foresters and fishermen in their vital role of service.I offer the unflagging support of the catholic church and the full encouragement of the Holy See.I ask the God of Mercy to sustain FAO in meeting this constant challenge.16 October 1982JOHN PAUL II

MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IION THE OCCASION OF THE 2nd WORLD FOOD DAY*

On the occasion of the observance of World Food Day 1982, I wish to express to you my full and wholehearted support of the Food and Agriculture Organization in its unremitting efforts to alleviate hunger and malnutrition.

The struggle to remedy these ills which deeply affect immense numbers of our brothers and sisters deserves the active solidarity of all nations and all men and women of good will.

It is my hope that the attention of the world will once again be directed to the urgency of feeding all the members of the human family.

In praising all those who work perseveringly to improve food supplies and to assist farmers, foresters and fishermen in their vital role of service.

I offer the unflagging support of the catholic church and the full encouragement of the Holy See.

I ask the God of Mercy to sustain FAO in meeting this constant challenge.

16 October 1982

JOHN PAUL II

*Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. V, 3 p. 826.

L'Osservatore Romano19.10.1982 p.1.L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.43 p.2.

L'Osservatore Romano19.10.1982 p.1.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.43 p.2.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn.43 p.2.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See