VIDEO MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IITO THE PEOPLE OF THE PHILIPPINESON THE EVE OF THE POPE'S APOSTOLIC JOURNEY

Tuesday, 10 January 1995

Dear People of the Philippines,Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,

In the words of Saint Paul: "I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, because your faith is proclaimed in all the world" (Rom. 1:8).

From Rome I send you this greeting as I look forward to my visit to your country. Two great events invite me to come once more to your beautiful Archipelago.The 400th anniversaryof the first organization of the Church’s life in this region, with the establishmentof the Archdiocese of Manila and the suffragan See of Cebu, Caceres and Nueva Segovia. And the celebration of the Tenth World Youth Day, a joyful appointment with Filippino youth and with young people from all over the world to pray and mediate on the words of Christ:As the Father sent me, so am I sending you" (Jn. 20:21).

In God’s loving Providence the two celebrations have coincided, and so I will comeamong you as a servant of the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. This is my mission as Successor of Peter, a mission which I try to fulfil in Rome and in every other part of the world to which the Holy Spirit leads me.

The 400th anniversaryof ecclesiastical organization in your country is an opportunity for you to look with gratitude on what your forbears have achieved and to commit yourselves anew to the great tasks which still remain before Christ’s disciples in your own country and in the vast continent of Asia.The World Youth Dayencourages us all to look with hope to the future which belongs to your young people.

With my visit I wish to show my friendship and esteem for the whole nation, and to confirm my Catholic brothers and sisters in their faith. I pray constantly that God will bless your efforts to meet the great challenges facing you, as you seek to build your national life on the principles of respect for human dignity, justice in all things, harmony and solidarity among all sectors of the population.

May God be with you all, and may the Virgin Mother of Antipolo intercede for all your needs.

Until we meet, God bless the Philippines!

Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!(Long live the Philippines!)

IOANNES PAULUS PP. II

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See