ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIVTO DIPLOMATIC STAFFIN APOSTOLIC NUNCIATURES

Clementine HallMonday, 17 November 2025

[Multimedia]

__________________

In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Peace be with you!

Your Eminence, Your Excellencies,Dear priests!

I express my gratitude to the Cardinal Secretary of State for his kind words, as well as the Superiors of the Secretariat of State, in particular the Secretary for the Pontifical Representations and for what is known as the Third Section, which has kindly organized these days of fraternity, prayer and dialogue.

Your presence is a source of special joy for me, because for the first time I am welcoming you all together. The occasion is very significant: the Jubilee of Hope. Like so many pilgrims, you too have come to Rome, to the tomb of the Apostle Peter, to confirm your faith and renew the resolutions that inspire your ministry. It could truly be emphasized that we have done this, that you have done this together with all of God’s people, and how important it is to recognize that your service is with God’s people, not apart from them. And so to come on a pilgrimage is truly a way to walk together with the entire Church. The Holy Year is a providential opportunity for everyone to rediscover and explore the beauty of vocation, that is, our common calling to holiness, which commits us every day to being witnesses of Christ, the living hope for the world.

I would like first of all to thank you because, as the Apostle reminds us (cf.Phil3:12), you did not hesitate before the voice of the Master, who invites us to follow Him, leaving all else behind in order to take the redeeming word of the Gospel to the ends of the earth. This call resounds in a truly special way for you, who have been chosen to exercise the priestly ministry in the Pontifical Representations: a gift and commitment to be the presence of the whole Church everywhere and, in particular, of the pastoral care of the Pope, who presides over her in charity.

Certainly, your particular service is arduous and therefore requires a heart that burns for God and is open to men; it demands study and expertise, self-denial and courage; it grows in confidence in Jesus and in docility to the Church, expressed in obedience to Superiors. In the countries where you work, meeting different peoples and languages, do not forget that the first witness to give is that of priests who love Christ and are devoted to the edification of his Body. Serving the ecclesial communities, you are a reflection of the Pope’s affection for and proximity to each one, maintaining a livelysentire cum Ecclesia. I think especially of those who find themselves in contexts of difficulty, conflict and poverty, where there is no shortage of moments of despair. Precisely in these hardships, remember that the Church supports you in prayer: therefore, reaffirm your priestly identity, drawing strength from the Sacraments, fraternal communion and constant docility to the Holy Spirit.

By cultivating those human virtues that are expressed in daily words and deeds, build relationships with everyone, resisting the temptation to isolate yourselves. Instead, remain grafted onto the ecclesial body and in the history of peoples: both that from which you come and that to which you are sent. Each nation offers you its own traditions to know, love and respect, just as the farmer respects the land and, by cultivating it, reaps the good fruit of his labour. Do not be detached, then, but passionate disciples of Christ, immersing yourselves in the contexts in which you live and work in an evangelical style. The great missionaries remind us, in fact, that inculturation is not a folkloric attitude, because it arises from the desire to devote ourselves to the land and the people we serve.

The new allegiance you experience does not constitute an alternative to the social and ecclesial contexts you come from. It is therefore necessary to continue to nurture, as far as possible, the bond with your own particular Church. When this sense of belonging is lacking, demotivation sets in: we then become like trees without roots. If instead it continues to receive vital sap, the tree can even be transplanted elsewhere and thus bear new fruit.

In moments of difficulty, which we sometimes experience, it is good for us to confirm our motivation with the words, for example, of Saint Augustine: “Pondus meum, amor meus” (ConfessionesXIII, 9). Even the great prophet Elias, at a certain point, had the impression that all his work had been in vain. However, the Lord raised him up again, showing him a certain destination and a sure path to walk (cf.1 Kings19:1’18). Dear friends, climb your own inner Horeb every day, that is, the place where the Spirit of God speaks to your heart. In every Pontifical Representation there is a chapel, the true centre of your home, where every day, together with the Apostolic Nuncio, the religious and your collaborators, you celebrate the Eucharist, raising up to the Lord prayers of praise and supplication. May the light of the Tabernacle dispel shadows and anxieties, illuminating the path you are travelling. Thus, the word of the Lord Jesus is fulfilled: you are the salt of the earth and the light of the world (cf.Mt5:13-14). Guarding this miracle of grace, be pilgrims of hope, especially where peoples lack justice and peace.

I hope that these days lived in fraternity and prayer may reinvigorate your spiritual life and help you to pursue fervently the mission that the Church has entrusted to you. Please convey my greetings to the Heads of Missions with whom you cooperate and whom you had the opportunity to meet last June, and also to your family members. I entrust you all to the guardianship of the Saints Apostles Peter and Paul, by the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary,Mater Ecclesiae, and I impart my heartfelt Apostolic Blessing. Thank you.

_________________________________________

Holy See Press Office Bulletin, 17 November 2025

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See