MORNING MASS IN THE CHAPEL OF THEDOMUS SANCTAE MARTHAE

HOMILY OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCIS

"Choose to proclaim so as not to fall into our sepulchers"

Monday, 13 April 2020

[Multimedia]

Introduction

Today, let us pray for government leaders, scientists and politicians who are beginning to research a way out of the pandemic, though its “aftermath” has already begun: may they find the right way, always for the good of their people.

Homily

Today’s Gospel presents us with an option, an everyday option, a human option but one that has applied since that day: the choice between the joy and hope of the resurrection of Jesus, and nostalgia for the tomb.

The women go forward in bringing the proclamation (seeMt28:8): God always begins with women, always. They open up the way. They do not doubt: they know; they had seen Him, they had touched Him. They had also seen the empty tomb. It is true that the disciples could not believe it and said: “But these women are probably a little too imaginative”… I don’t know, they had their doubts. But the women were sure and in the end they continued on this path until today: Jesus is risen, He is alive among us! (seeMt28:9-10) And then there is the other choice: it is better not to live, with the empty tomb. This empty tomb will bring us many problems. And the decision to hide the fact. As always: when we do not serve God, the Lord, we serve the other god, money. Let us remember what Jesus said: there are two masters, the Lord God and the lord of money. One cannot serve both of them. And to get away from this fact, this reality, the priests and the doctors of the Law chose the other road, the one offered by the lord of money and they paid: they paid for silence (seeMt28:12-13). The silence of the witnesses. One of the guards confessed as soon as Jesus died: “Truly this man was the Son of God!” (Mk15:39). These poor men do not understand, they are afraid because their life is at stake… and they went to the priests, to the doctors of the Law. And they paid: they paid for their silence, and this, dear brothers and sisters, this is not a bribe: this is corruption, pure corruption. If you do not confess Jesus Christ the Lord, think about why: where the seal on your sepulchre is, where corruption is. Many people do not confess Jesus because they do not know Him, because we have not announced Him consistently, and this is our fault.But when before the evidence one takes this road, it is the road of the devil, it is the road of corruption. You’re paid and you keep quiet.

Even today, in front of the coming - which we hope will come soon - the coming end of this pandemic, there is the same option: we will either make a stake on life, in favour of the resurrection of our people, or we will make a stake on the god of money, turning back to the tomb of hunger, slavery, war, the making of weapons, of children without an education… the tomb is there. May the Lord, both in our personal life and in our social life, always help us to choose proclamation: the proclamation that is a horizon, that is open, always; may He lead us to choose the good of the people. And never to fall into the tomb of the god money.

Spiritual Communion

Those who cannot receive communion can now make a spiritual communion:

My Jesus, I believe that You are present in the Most Blessed Sacrament. I love you above all things, and I desire to receive You into my soul. Since I cannot now receive you sacramentally, come at least spiritually into my heart. I embrace You as if you were already there, and I unite myself wholly to You. Never permit me to be separated from You.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See