ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE AMBASSADOR OF ECUADOR*

Monday, 5 July 1976

Mr. Ambassador,

We are happy to welcome Your Excellency heartily today, on the occasion of the presentation of the Letters which accredit you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Ecuador to the Holy See.

In the respectful words of greeting you have just uttered, Your Excellency emphasized the close bands of clear understanding and religious ties that unite your country with the Apostolic See. Certainly, the Catholic faith, which is an essential element in the configuration of the history and personality of your country continues to enlighten consciences and also inspire initiatives within the noble Ecuadorian nation.

This itself, as Your Excellency said, testifies happily to a fruitful presence of the Church in Ecuador. In the faithful accomplishment of her mission, she has exerted herself indefatigably in this work of cultivating so many institutions which, nourished in the fountain of truth, justice and peace of the Gospel message, set out to give individuals and society a real human and Christian dimension.

Not harbouring temporal aims in her mission, the Church desires nothing better than to be at the side of her sons, sharing their realities and hopes. And in this aspiration towards free and disinterested service, we see with deep joy the work carried out by the Episcopate of Ecuador, supported by its priests, religious and faithful.

We are, furthermore, fully confident that the Church in Ecuador will continue to instil into hearts the stimulus to do better, to increase moral and religious values, the primacy of the spirit, which show the inviolable dignity of man, protect brotherly social life and promote the complete progress of the individual and the community with the resolute collaboration of everyone.

Formulating these wishes which we transform into a prayer to the Almighty, we also wish to assure you, Mr. Ambassador, of our goodwill for the successful accomplishment of your mission. Finally, we request you to convey our best wishes and regards to the supreme authorities. We willingly extend these wishes and regards to all our beloved sons in Ecuador. upon which we implore constant divine aid.

*ORa n.29 p.8.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See