GREETINGOF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISTO SUPPORTERS OF"A CHANCE IN LIFE"

Consistory HallMonday, 9 December 2019

[Multimedia]

Dear Brothers and Sisters,

I am pleased that we have this opportunity to meet. I thank Mr Guy Chiarello for his greeting, and I offer a cordial welcome to all of you, supporters of the organizationA Chance in Life.

Born of the vision of Monsignor John Patrick Carroll-Abbing, over the years your organization has developed to the point where today it supports a variety of educational initiatives that have benefited thousands of boys and girls in Italy, Bolivia, Colombia, Guatemala and Peru. These initiatives offer children and adolescents in situations of particular hardship a chance to surmount their difficulties and to realize fully God’s plan for each of them.

The first step, greatly desired by your founder, was the national Boys’ Town of Italy foundation. Thanks to your generous support, today it can boast a long tradition of commitment to the service of disadvantaged young people in accordance with an educational methodology based on self-governance. In creative fidelity to its original charism, the foundation is making an effort to be more incisive and effective in carrying out its mission in a world that presents ever new educational challenges. I am pleased to know that these efforts are inspired by the recommendations I made in the Encyclical LetterLaudato Si’in the name of an integral ecology aimed at the development of each individual and the world around us.

It is essential to train new generations in the exercise of an active and participatory citizenship centred on the human person and care for the environment. Technological innovation is also needed to achieve these goals, and young people, if well motivated, will in fact be able to attain them, since they have been born and raised in today’s fast-paced technological world.

I am certain that, as it faces this new challenge, the national foundation for Boys’ and Girls’ Towns will be able to count on your support. I thank you for your sensitivity and concern for the least of our brothers and sisters. May God reward your passionate commitment and always accompany your efforts to build a world of greater fraternity.

Upon all of you I invoke the Lord’s blessing, which I gladly extend to your families. And I ask you, please, to remember to pray for me.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See