ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL IITO THE OFFICIALS OF THE UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATION*

Monday, 18 June 1990

Ladies and Gentlemen,

I am pleased to welcome the distinguished officials of the United Nations Organization and its associated agencies who are taking part in the Inter-Agency Meeting on Language Arrangements, Documentation and Publication being held this week in Rome. It is my hope that this gathering will assist you in your important work of coordinating communication and collaboration among the various specialized organizations within the United Nations system.

From your own experience in managing the technical aspects of communication between people of diverse languages and cultural backgrounds, you are well aware of the patience and perseverance which authentic dialogue requires. From the time of its establishment in the aftermath of the Second World War and throughout a period of history marked by unprecedented global conflict, the United Nations Organization has patiently attempted to construct channels for effective communication and dialogue within the international community. Today, at a time of rapidly changing geopolitical realities, this task remains essential to the development of that new solidarity among nations and peoples, based upon an unstinting respect for the dignity and fundamental rights of the human person, which can provide the moral foundation and sure guarantee of a just and lasting peace in our world.

Ladies and Gentlemen: in your presence I once again express my hope that "in view of its universal character, the United Nations Organization will never cease to be the forum, the high tribune, from which all man’s problems are appraised in truth and justice" (Ioannis Pauli PP. IIAllocutio in Palatio Nationum Unitarum in urbe "New York", ad Nationum Legatos habita, 7, die 2 oct. 1979:Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II,II, 2 [1979] 525). As you seek to cooperate in this noble enterprise by contributing your technical expertise, I assure you that the Church looks to the United Nations Organization with confidence and support, and with a great hope that it will play an ever more effective role in the development of a civilization of peace and respect for human rights throughout the world. Upon all of you and upon your deliberations this week, I invoke the abundant blessings of Almighty God.

*Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. XIII, 1 p. 1628-1629.

L'Osservatore Romano19.6.1990 p.6.

L'Osservatore Romano. Weekly Edition in Englishn. 26 p.8.

© Copyright 1990 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See