JOHN PAUL IIREGINA CÆLIThird Sunday of Easter, 25 April 2004

JOHN PAUL II

REGINA CÆLI

Third Sunday of Easter, 25 April 2004

I wish to address a cordial greeting to the pilgrims who have come from various countries to pay homage to the new Blesseds.

To Spanish-speaking pilgrims

I greet with affection the Cardinals, Bishops, priests and other Spanish-speaking pilgrims present, especially the Missionaries of Mary Immaculate and St Catherine of Siena, and the Handmaids of St Margaret Mary and the Poor, celebrating the Beatification of their respective Foundresses. I also greet the Salesians of Spain, rejoicing in the witness ofSr Eusebia Palomino. May these new Blesseds assist and encourage everyone towards the goal of holiness.

To Portuguese-speaking pilgrims

I give a heartfelt greeting to the Portuguese-speaking pilgrims together with their Pastors and the Authorities, who are celebrating the Beatification ofAlexandrina of Balasar. May the Immaculate Heart of Mary, to whom she was especially devoted, be a portal of hope for humanity of our time.

To Polish-speaking pilgrims

I cordially greet my fellow countrymen and women. Today the Salesians celebrate as they welcome a new patron, Bl.Augusto Czartoryski. I address to them a special greeting: may the example of your Blessed Brother strengthen your zeal and may his protection and intercession sustain you in your daily duties. It is a personal joy for me to be able to welcome to the Vatican on this occasion the family of Bl. Augusto, so well-deserving for Poland. I was closely linked to them as Bishop of Krakow, especially with the Bishop Prelate Stanislaus Czartoryski. I cordially bless all of the pilgrims here present and those united to us by way of radio and television.

To Italian-speaking pilgrims

I greet the Sisters of Charity of St Joan Antida Thouret and the faithful who are devoted toNemesia Valle, especially those who have come from the Archdiocese of Turin.

Each of the new Blesseds fostered a filial and profound devotion to Mary Most Holy. With the same trust we also turn to her, imploring that the human family may discover the paths of justice and peace.

© Copyright 2004 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See