APOSTOLIC JOURNEY OF POPE LEO XIVTO ALGERIA, CAMEROON, ANGOLA AND EQUATORIAL GUINEA(13–23 April 2026)

HOLY MASS

HOMILY OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIV

Yaoundé-Ville AirportSaturday, 18 April 2026

[Multimedia]

_____________________________

Dear brothers and sisters, peace be with you!It is the peace of Christ, whose presence illuminates our path and calms life’s storms.

We celebrate this Holy Mass at the conclusion of my visit in Cameroon, and I am very grateful for how you have welcomed me and for the moments of joy and faith which we have experienced together.

As we heard in the Gospel, faith does not spare us from tumult and tribulations. At times, it can seem that fear has the upper hand. However, we know that even in these moments, Jesus does not abandon us, just like he did not abandon the disciples on the Sea of Galilee.

Three of the four evangelists recount the episode proclaimed today, each in their own way, with a message suited for their intended audience. Saint Mark (cf. 6:45-52) narrates that the Lord comes to the disciples while they are struggling to row against the strong wind, which ceases as soon as Jesus climbs into the boat with them. Saint Matthew (cf. 14:22-33) adds a detail: Peter wants to go to the Lord by walking on the waves. Once he steps out of the boat, however, he lets himself be overcome by fear and he begins to sink. Christ takes him by the hand, saves him and rebukes him for his incredulity.

In Saint John’s version, which was proclaimed today (cf. 6:16-21), the Savior draws near to the disciples walking on the water and says: “It is I; do not be afraid” (v. 20). The evangelist emphasizes that “it was now dark” (v. 17). According to Jewish tradition, “water” with its depth and mystery, often calls to mind the netherworld, chaos, danger and death. Together with darkness, it evokes the forces of evil, which human beings by their own power are not able to dominate. At the same time, however, by remembering the miracles wrought in the exodus, water is understood as a place of passage, a crossing through which God powerfully frees his people from slavery.

Throughout the ages, the Church has navigated many storms and “strong winds.” We too can identify with the feelings of fear and doubt experienced by the disciples while crossing the lake of Tiberias. Such is our experience in moments when we seem to be sinking, overcome by adverse forces, when everything appears bleak and we feel alone and weak. But it is not so. Jesus is with us always, stronger than any power of evil. In every storm, he comes to us and repeats: “I am here with you: do not be afraid.” This is why we can get up again after every fall, not allowing ourselves to be stopped by any tempest. Rather we go forward always with courage and trust. And it is thanks to him that, asPope Francissaid, so many “men and women… who honor our people, who honor our Church… are strong in carrying forward their lives, their family, their work, their faith” (Catechesis, 14 May 2014, 2).

Jesus draws near to us. He does not immediately calm the storm, but comes to us in the midst of the danger, and invites us, in our joys and sorrows, to remain together with him, like the disciples, in the same boat. He invites us not to distance ourselves from those who suffer, but to draw near to them, to embrace them. No one must be left alone to confront life’s adversities. For this reason, every community has the obligation to create and sustain structures of solidarity and mutual aid in which, when faced with crises –– be they social, political, medical or economic –– everyone can give and receive assistance according to their own capacity and needs. The words of Jesus, “it is I,” remind us that in a society founded on respect for human dignity, everyone’s contribution is valued as important and unique, regardless of thestatusor position that each one has in the eyes of the world.

The exhortation “do not be afraid,” then, takes on a broader meaning, even at a social and political level, as an encouragement to confront problems and challenges –– particularly those associated with poverty and justice –– together, with a sense of civic and civil responsibility. Faith does not separate the spiritual from the social. Indeed, it gives Christians the strength to interact with the world, responding to the needs of others, especially the weakest. The isolated efforts of individuals are not enough for the salvation of a community: instead, what is needed is a communal commitment, which integrates the spiritual and moral dimensions of the Gospel in the heart of local institutions and structures, making them instruments for the common good, and not places of conflict, self-interest or sterile struggles.

Today’s first reading (cf.Acts6:1-7) speaks about this. In this passage, we see how the Church confronts its first crisis concerning growth. The rapid increase in the number of disciples (v. 1) brings new challenges for the community in the exercise of charity, which the Apostles are no longer able to carry out by themselves. Some are overlooked in the distribution of food, and for this reason the grumbling grows and a sense of injustice threatens unity. Daily service to the poor was an essential practice in the early Church, meant to support the weakest, particularly widows and orphans. However, it was necessary to balance this service with the other compelling needs to preach and teach. A solution was not simple. The Apostles, then, gathered together and shared their concerns, discussing the matters in light of Jesus’ teaching. They united themselves in prayer in order to overcome the obstacles and misunderstandings that at first sight seemed insurmountable. Thus, they gave life to something new, choosing men of “good standing, full of the Spirit and of wisdom” (v. 3) and appointing them, through the laying on of hands, to acts of service with a spiritual mission. Listening to the voice of the Holy Spirit and being attentive to the cry of the suffering, they not only avoided division within the community, but they also equipped it with new instruments suitable to its growth, transforming a moment of crisis into an occasion of enrichment and development for everyone.

At times, family and societal life require the courage to change mindsets and structures, so that the dignity of the human person may always remain the primary focus and so that inequality and marginalization may be overcome. After all, God who became man identified himself with the least, and this makes the preferential care for the poor a fundamental part of our Christian identity (cf. Apostolic ExhortationEvangelii Gaudium, 198; Apostolic ExhortationDilexi Te, 16-17).

Brothers and sisters, today we say farewell to each other. Each one returns to his or her occupation and the ship that is the Church continues on its course towards the final goal, thanks to the grace of God and the commitment of every person. Let us keep the memory of the beautiful moments that we have experienced together alive in our hearts. Even in the midst of difficulties, let us continue to make space for Jesus, allowing him to enlighten and renew us every day by his presence. The Church in Cameroon is alive, young, blessed with gifts and enthusiasm, energetic in its variety and magnificent in its harmony. With the help of the Virgin Mary, our Mother, may your joyful presence continue to blossom. And may the strong winds, which are never lacking in life, be an occasion for growth in the joyful service of God and your brothers and sisters through sharing, listening, praying and the desire to grow together.

____________________________________

Final Words of Gratitude of His Holiness Pope Leo XIV

Dear brothers and sisters, this celebration marks the conclusion of my visit to Cameroon. I extend my heartfelt gratitude to the Archbishop and to all the pastors of the Church in this country.

I renew my appreciation for the Civil Authorities and all those who helped prepare and organize this trip.

Thank you to everyone, especially the sick, the elderly and the nuns who offered their prayers.

People of God living and journeying in Cameroon, do not be afraid! Remain firmly united to Christ our Lord! With the power of his Spirit, you will be the salt and light of this land! Thank you very much.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See