ADDRESS OF POPE JOHN PAUL IITO H.E. MR HAROLD MCDONALD FORDENEWAMBASSADOR OF BARBADOS TO THE HOLY SEE*

Monday, 1 April 1985

Mr Ambassador,

It is a pleasure to accept the Letters accrediting you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Barbados to the Holy See. I warmly welcome you to this new assignment, and while expressing my gratitude for the kind greetings which you have conveyed on behalf of the Head of Government, Mr Bernard St John, I would ask you to reciprocate his cordial good wishes.

As Your Excellency mentioned, the promotion of justice and prosperity for all peoples is a common concern for Barbados and the Holy See. The diplomatic relations which we enjoy help us to work towards the achievement of this end. At the same time, they symbolize the mutual respect and esteem which characterize these relations and are a pledge of our commitment to work together for the spiritual, moral and cultural betterment of every person, and of families and communities as well.

I appreciate your reference to the solicitude which I have shown for the plight of the destitute and deprived people of the world. The Catholic Church, following the example of Jesus Christ, seeks to reach out with special loving service to the poor and needy. In this, she willingly works side by side with other Christians and with all men and women of good will. Since governments have a unique role to fulfil in these important endeavours, the Church encourages the many worthy programmes which they carry out and she welcomes the opportunity to collaborate with these, to the extent possible and in keeping with her primary spiritual role.

I assure you of my heartfelt good wishes for all the people of your young nation. May the Lord bless you with harmony and all-round progress. May your families enjoy stability and peace. May God assist your leaders now and in the years ahead.

Your Excellency, I hope that your mission to the Holy See will meet with much success, and for its accomplishment you may be assured of all necessary assistance on the part of the Holy See.

*AAS 78 (1986), p. 246-247.

Insegnamenti di Giovanni Paolo II, vol. VIII, 1 pp. 898-899.

L'Attività della Santa Sede1985 pp. 249-250.

L'Osservatore Romano-Weekly edition in Englishn.15 p.8

.

© Copyright 1985 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See