PRESENTATION OF CREDENTIAL LETTERS BY THE AMBASSADORS OF INDIA, JORDAN, DENMARK, LUXEMBOURG,SÃO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE, RWANDA, TURKMENISTAN, ALGERIA, BANGLADESH, ZIMBABWE, AND KENYAACCREDITED TO HOLY SEE

ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER

Clementine HallSaturday, 7 December 2024

[Multimedia]

_____________________________

Your Excellencies,

I am pleased to welcome you to the Vatican for the presentation of the Letters accrediting you as Ambassadors Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of your respective nations to the Holy See: India, Jordan, Denmark, Luxembourg, São Tomé and Principe, Rwanda, Turkmenistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Zimbabwe and Kenya. I would ask you kindly to convey my respectful greetings to your Heads of State, together with the assurance of my prayers for them.

As you are well aware, you are embarking upon your new responsibilities at a critical time for international diplomacy. Our world is increasingly beset by problems that affect the entire human family and call for concerted action by all who are concerned for the future of our planet. I think of the continued devastating effects of climate change, which especially impact developing nations and the poorest members of society, the armed conflicts that cause untold suffering to so many of our brothers and sisters, and the plight of countless migrants and refugees fleeing their homelands in search of a better future for their families. Such issues have no simple solution, nor are they able to be resolved by the actions of one nation or a small group of states. Every country must have a voice in addressing these problems of international concern and formulating comprehensive and long-term solutions. In this regard, the patient work of diplomacy is of the utmost importance.

Amid difficulties, setbacks, the clash of arms and conflicting claims to be on the side of right, the international community cannot renounce its duty to seek peace by fostering dialogue, reconciliation, mutual understanding, respect for the dignity and rights of each individual and people, and for the demands of international law. By its presence in the international community, the Holy See, in accordance with its specific nature and mission, seeks to promote such dialogue in the service of the common good, without advancing political, commercial, or military goals. Through its “positive neutrality” – I did not say “neutrality”, but “positive neutrality” – the Holy See also strives to contribute to the resolution of conflicts and other questions by making clear their intrinsic ethical dimension.

History has shown that much progress can be made in resolving seemingly intractable situations through quiet, patient and persistent diplomatic efforts inspired by mutual respect, good will and moral conviction. I once heard it said that the work of a diplomat is like a minuet dance: small steps in order to achieve harmony. Indeed, many current global problems are longstanding, which rather than discouraging us should prompt us to look for new and innovative solutions.

In these days, as the old year draws to a close and we await the dawn of a new year, we are invited to look to the future with hope, with a “desire and expectation of good things to come, despite our not knowing what the future may bring” (Bull of Indiction of the Ordinary Jubilee of the Year 2025Spes Non Confundit, 1). On24 December, I will inaugurate the Church’s Jubilee Year of 2025 by opening the Holy Door of Saint Peter’s Basilica. The principal message of the Jubilee is precisely that of hope. As the Church sets out on a pilgrimage of renewed hope in the power of the Risen Christ to renew all things (cf.Rev21:5), I encourage the members of the diplomatic community accredited to the Holy See to continue working with courage and creativity in promoting bonds of friendship, cooperation and dialogue in the service of peace. Your work, often quiet and hidden, will help to plant the seeds of a future of hope for our war-weary world.

Dear Ambassadors, as you now begin your mission to the Apostolic See, I offer each of you my prayerful good wishes, and I assure you that the Secretariat of State and the other Dicasteries and Offices of the Roman Curia are ready to assist you in the fulfilment of your duties. Upon all of you, your loved ones, and the members of your staff, I invoke God’s abundant blessings. Thank you!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See