MESSAGE OF JOHN PAUL IITO "THE SPIRITUAL FAMILY THE WORK"

Dear Sisters and Brothers of The Spiritual Family The Work,

1. In the joyful communion of the Triune God, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, I send you my heartfelt greetings. The joy over the approval of your spiritual family encourages you to give renewed witness to your solidarity with the Successor of Peter and your readiness to serve him. With you I gladly thank Christ, the Lord of the Church, for your charism and I pray that it may produce abundant fruits.2. In the spirit of your foundress you are determined to face the challenges of our time with the strength of the Catholic faith. You must serve the Church and humanity joyfully as a contemplative and, at the same time, apostolic community, that seeks to work as a leaven in the world.

You have generously accepted the invitation of the Lord to get "to work" for His Kingdom. If you always remain open to the plan of God and put your talents at the service of the salvific mission of the Church, your Spiritual Family can become a powerful instrument of the new evangelization, especially in Europe. Your lived surrender to God is the best response to the urgent questions of mankind and to the needs of the times.

3. In dialogue with the Father, Jesus Christ summed up his salvific mission:"I have glorified you on earth, having accomplished the work which you gave me to do"(Jn17,4). The work of Christ, the glorification of God and the redemption of mankind, is continued by the Church in the power of the Holy Spirit throughout time. Your spiritual family was born from the Church. As members ofThe Workyou are ready to make the mission of the Church of Christ your own.

4. The Church is the great work of God. If her divine origin is questioned at times today,The Workcontributes to the understanding and living of the mystery of the Church in its profundity. Remain faithful to the aim of your Community:  you are the reflection of the Church to the praise of the Triune God and for the salvation of humanity. Bear witness to the beauty of the Church as the People of God, the Spouse of Christ and the temple of the Holy Spirit. Remain deeply rooted in the Holy Eucharist, the source of unity with God and with one another.5. The spirit of adoration is vital in your Community. God is in the centre:  your thoughts and deeds revolve around Him. In this wayThe Workcan be an effective instrument against the resignation, that at times can take hold even of the servants of the Church. May your prayers and actions in the great work of God bear fruit for the salvation of mankind! May the Lord of History guide the way of your spiritual family into the future. I warmly impart to you my Apostolic Blessing.

The Vatican, 10 November 2001.

JOHN PAUL II

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See