ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIATO THE HOLY SEE*

Friday 15, June 1973

Mr Ambassador,

It is a pleasure for us to receive you today and to accept the Letters of Credence appointing you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Republic of Liberia to the Holy See. We extend to you a cordial welcome, and thank you for conveying the greetings and good wishes of your esteemed President, His Excellency Dr William R. Tolbert Jr. These sentiments we warmly reciprocate.

As you have so rightly said, we live in a world in which distances have been reduced to insignificance by the marvellous achievements of modern science. The peoples of all nations have been brought closer together than has ever before been possible. To match this conquest of distances we have to strive to attain that harmony of throught and intent which alone can ensure that the new contacts and communications will contribute to the true progress of the human race in a world governed by the ideals of peace and justice.

We therefore gladly avail ourself of the occasion to confirm the desire of the Holy See to continue to contribute as far as possible both to the spiritual well-being and integral development of your country, and to offer its assistance in furthering the programmes to which you have alluded. In offering this cooperation the Catholic Church is guided solely by the command given to her by her Founder, Jesus Christ, namely to bring all men to the knowledge of their true destiny and to help them to attain it. We are pleased that this aim is fully appreciated and shared by the Government of the Republic of Liberia and by its people.

As we reiterate our welcome, we would ask you to assure the Authorities of your country that we keep them in our prayers, invoking upon them and those whom they serve the abundant blessings of Almighty God.

We assure Your Excellency that the Holy See is ever at your disposal to aid you in your task, and we extend our personal good wishes for the happy and successful accomplishment of your mission.

*AAS 65 (1973), p.375-376;

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. XI, p.601-602;

L’Attività della Santa Sede 1973, p.219-220;

OR 16.6.1973, p.1;

ORa n.26 p.4.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See