POPE FRANCIS

REGINA CAELI

Library of the Apostolic PalaceSunday, 24 May 2020

[Multimedia]

Dear Brothers and Sisters, Good Morning,

Today, in Italy and in other countries, the Solemnity of the Ascension of the Lord is being celebrated. The Gospel reading (cf.Mt28:16-20) shows us the Apostles who gather in Galilee, at “the mountain to which Jesus had directed them” (v. 16). The Lord’s final encounter with his followers takes place here, on the mountain. The “mountain” has a strong symbolic and evocative charge. Jesus proclaimed the Beatitudes on the Mount (cf.Mt5:1-12); He withdrew to the mountains to pray (cf.Mt14:23). He welcomed the crowds there and healed the sick (cf.Mt15:29). However this time on the mountain, he is no longer the Master who acts and teaches, but rather the Risen One who asks the disciples to take action and to proclaim, entrusting to them the mandate to continue his work.

He assigns to them the mission to all the peoples. He says: “Go, therefore, and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you” (vv. 19-20). The contents of the mission entrusted to the Apostles are the following: to proclaim, baptize, teach and walk the path traced by the Master, that is, the living Gospel. This message of salvation first of all implies the duty of witness — one cannot proclaim without witness — to which we too, today’s disciples, are called to explain our faith. Faced with such a demanding task, and thinking of our weaknesses, we feel inadequate, as the Apostles themselves surely felt. But we must not be discouraged, remembering the words Jesus addressed to them before ascending to Heaven: “I am with you always, to the close of the age” (v. 20).

This promise ensures the constant and consoling presence of Jesus among us. But how is this presence realised? Through His Spirit, who leads the Church to walk through history as the companion of every person. That Spirit sent by Christ and the Father, who works the remission of sins and sanctifies all those who are repentant and open themselves with confidence to his gift. With the promise to remain with us until the end of time, Jesus inaugurates the style of his presence in the world as the Risen One. Jesus is present in the world but with another style, the style of the Risen One, that is a presence that is revealed in the Word, in the Sacraments and in the constant and interior action of the Holy Spirit. The Feast of the Ascension tells us that although Jesus ascended to Heaven to dwell gloriously at the right hand of the Father, he is still and always among us: this is the source of our strength, our perseverance and our joy, from the very presence of Jesus among us with the strength of the Holy Spirit.

May the Virgin Mary accompany our journey with her maternal protection. May may we learn from her the gentleness and courage to be witnesses in the world of the Risen Lord.

After praying the Regina Caeli, the Holy Father continued:

Let us join spiritually with the Catholic faithful in China, who today celebrate with particular devotion the Feast of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Help of Christians and Patroness of China, worshipped in the Shrine of Sheshan in Shanghai. Let us entrust to the guidance and protection of our Heavenly Mother the Pastors and faithful of the Catholic Church in that great country, so that they may be strong in faith and steadfast in fraternal union, joyful witnesses and promoters of charity and fraternal hope, and good citizens.

Dearest Catholic brothers and sisters in China, I wish to assure you that the universal Church, of which you are an integral part, shares your hopes and supports you in your trials of life. She accompanies you with prayer for a new outpouring of the Holy Spirit, so that the light and beauty of the Gospel, God’s power for the salvation of whoever believes, may shine within you. In expressing to you all once again my great and sincere affection, I impart a special Apostolic Blessing. May Our Lady keep you always!

Finally, let us entrust to the intercession of Mary Help of Christians all the Lord’s disciples and all the people of good will who in this difficult time, in every part of the world, passionately and committedly work for peace, for dialogue between nations, for service to the poor, for the care of creation and for the victory of humanity over every disease of body, heart and soul.

Today is World Social Communications day,dedicated this year to the theme of storytelling. May this event encourage us to tell and share constructive stories that help us to understand that we are all part of a story that is larger than ourselves, and we can look to the future with hope if we truly care for one another as brothers and sisters.

Today, on the day of Mary Help of Christians, I address an affectionate and cordial greeting to the Salesians. I recall with gratitude the spiritual formation I received from the sons and daughters of Don Bosco.

Today I was supposed to go to Acerra to support the faith of that population and the commitment of those who are working to counter the drama of pollution in the so-called “Land of Fire”. My visit has been postponed. However, I send my greetings, my blessing and my encouragement to the Bishop, the priests, the families and the entire diocesan community, as we look forward to meeting each other as soon as possible. I will go there, for sure!

And todayis also the fifth anniversary of the EncyclicalLaudato Si’, which sought to draw attention to the cry of the earth and of the poor. Thanks to the initiative of theDicastery for Promoting Integral Human Development, the“Laudato Si’Week” we have just celebrated will blossom intoa special Year of the anniversary ofLaudato Si’, a special year to reflect on the Encyclical, from 24 May this year until 24 May next year. I invite all people of good will to participate, in order to take care of our common home and our most fragile brothers and sisters. Theprayer dedicated to this Yearwill be published on the site. It will be beautiful to pray it.

Prayer for the special year of the anniversary of Laudato Si’

Loving God,Creator of Heaven, Earth, and all therein contained.Open our minds and touch our hearts,so that we can be part of Creation, your gift.Be present to those in need in these difficult times, especially the poorest and most vulnerable.Help us to show creative solidarity as we confront the consequences of the global pandemic.Make us courageous in embracing the changes required to seek the common good.Now more than ever, may we all feel interconnected and interdependent.Enable us to succeed in listening and responding to the cry of the Earth and the cry of the poor.May their current sufferings become the birth-pangs of a more fraternal and sustainable world.

We pray through Christ our Lord, under the loving gaze of Mary Help of Christians.

Amen.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See