APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO POLAND

FAREWELL CEREMONY AT JASNA GORA

ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS JOHN PAUL II

CzestochowaWednesday, 6 June 1979

1. There is a custom—a beautiful custom—for pilgrims whom you have welcomed at Jasna Górato make a farewell visit to you before leaving here. I remember very many of these farewell visits, these special audiences that you, Mother of Jasna Góra, have granted me, when I was still a high-school student and came here with my father and the pilgrimage from the whole of my native parish of Wadowice. I remember the audience that you granted to me and to my companions when we came here clandestinely, as representatives of the university students of Krakow, during the terrible Occupation, in order not to interrupt the continuity of the university pilgrimages to Jasna Góra, pilgrimages begun in the memorable year 1936. I remember so many otherfarewell visits to you,so many other moments of parting, when I came here as chaplain to young people, later as Bishop, leading pilgrimages of priests from the Archdiocese of Krakow.

2. Today I have come to you, Our Lady of Jasna Góra, with the venerable Primate of Poland, with the Archbishop of Krakow, with the Bishop of Czestochowa and with the whole of the Episcopate of my motherland,to bid you farewell once more and to ask your blessing for my journey.I come here, after these days that I have spent with them—as the first servant of your Son and as the successor of Peter in the See of Rome.The meaning of this pilgrimage is quite inexpressible. Ishall not even try to find the words to express what it has been for me and for us all, and what it will never cease to be. And so, Mother of the Church and Queen of Poland, forgive us all if we thank you only with the silence of our hearts; and if with this silence we sing you our "preface" of farewell.

I express my cordial thanks to all who have been pilgrims with me here during these days—in particular the custodians of the Shrine,the Pauline Fathers,led by their Superior General and Guardian of Jasna Góra.

4. Our Lady of the Bright Mountain, Mother of the Church!Once more I consecrate myself to you in your maternal slavery of love": Totus tuus!—Iam all yours! I consecrate to you the whole Church—everywhere and to the ends of the earth! I consecrate to you Humanity; I consecrate to you all men and women, my brothers and sisters. All the Peoples and the Nations. I consecrate to you Europe and all the continents. I consecrate to you Rome and Poland, united, through your servant, by a fresh bond of love.

Mother, accept us!

Mother, be our guide!

© Copyright 1979 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See