ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIVTO THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE STUDY VISIT OF YOUNG PRIESTS AND MONKSFROM THE EASTERN ORTHODOX CHURCHES

Consistory HallThursday, 5 February 2026

[Multimedia]

_________________________________

Peace be with you!Good morning to all of you, and welcome.

The first letter of Peter says, “Peace to all of you who are in Christ!” (1Pt5:14). With these very words of Saint Peter, I welcome you, priests and monks representing the Armenian, Coptic, Ethiopian, Eritrean, Malankara and Syriac Orthodox Churches. I also extend a fraternal greeting to Archbishop Khajag Barsamian and Metropolitan Barnaba El-Soryani, who are accompanying you. I would also like to express my respect and gratitude to the venerable leaders of your Oriental Orthodox Churches, who have appointed you to participate in this study visit organised by theDicastery for Promoting Christian Unity.

I hope you have enjoyed this visit, which was designed to give you the opportunity to learn more about the Catholic Church, in particular theRoman Curiaand Roman educational institutions. I am confident that your visit has also been a blessing to all those who have met you here, enabling them to learn more about your Churches.

As you know, we recently celebrated the Week of Prayer for Christian Unity, whose theme was taken from Saint Paul’s letter to the Ephesians, in which the Apostle stresses the importance of being united in the faith: “There is one body and one Spirit, just as you were called to the one hope of your calling” (Eph4:4).

As we know, Saint Paul travelled extensively throughout Israel, Asia Minor, Syria, Arabia and even Europe. By founding and visiting many Christian communities, he became aware of the particularities of each church, namely their ethnicity, customs, as well as the challenges and concerns. The Apostle realized that the communities could become too inward-looking, focusing on their own specific problems. As a result, throughout his letters, Saint Paul was determined to remind them that they were part of the one Mystical Body of Christ. In doing so, he encouraged them to support one another and maintain the unity of faith and teachings that reflect the transcendent nature and oneness of God.

Dear friends, the historic and cultural differences in our Churches represent a wonderful mosaic of our shared Christian heritage, which is something we can all appreciate. At the same time, we should continue to support each other, so that we may grow in our shared faith in Christ, who is the ultimate source of our peace (cf.Eph2:14). This requires that we learn to “disarm ourselves.” As Patriarch Athenagoras, a pioneer of the ecumenical movement, stated in a beautiful prayer: “I am disarmed of the need to be right, to justify myself by judging others,” by waging “the hardest war, the war against myself.” When we remove the prejudices we carry within ourselves, and disarm our hearts, we grow in charity, work more closely together and strengthen our bonds of unity in Christ. In this way, Christian unity also becomes a leaven for peace on earth and reconciliation of all.

Dear brothers in Christ, as I renew my gratitude for your visit, I assure you of my remembrance in prayer. May the Lord bless you and may the Blessed Virgin Mary, Mother of God, protect you and your beloved Churches.

Thank you very much. I invite you to pray together the Lord’s prayer:

Our Father…

May the Lord’s blessings come upon us all and keep us safe. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See