DISCORSO DI GIOVANNI PAOLO IIALL'ARCIVESCOVO DI CANTERBURYDR. GEORGE LEONARD CAREY

Martedì, 3 dicembre 1996

Your Grace,Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,I greet your in the Cove which the Holy Spirit pours into our hearts.

1. Thirty years ago, after the conclusion of the Second Vatican Council, Archbishop Michael Ramsey made official visit to Pope Paul VI. That first official visit to the Holy See by an Archbishop of Canterbury since before the tragic separation of the 16th century was to have great significance for relation between the Anglican Communion and the Catholic Church. It signalled to Catholics  and Anglicans that they should, in Christian charity, put conflict behind them and work to reestablish unity. Our predecessors did not underestimate the difficulties involved. Nor did they fail to understand the urgency of the task. They declared their intention to inaugurate a serious theological dialogue, which continues today, especially through the Anglican-Roman Catholic International Commission (ARCIC).

2. In the years since Archbishop Ramsey's visit some of the fruits hoped for have begun to appear. There has been above all a rediscovery of the degree ofreal though imperfect communionwhich exists between Anglicans and Catholics. In many parts of the world there is a new spirit of co-operation between us: we have joined more fervently in prayer for the gift of unity; we have begun to work together, to bear witness together, whenever possible, on the basis of so much that is common in our heritage. TheFinal Reportof the first stage of our international dialogue has highlighted points of convergence and even agreement not thought possible before ARCIC began its work. The path ahead may not be altogether clear to us, but we are here to recommit ourselves to following it.

The Commission's current study ofteaching authority in the Churchcan be of great help in the face of new areas of disagreement which have emerged in recent years. Sadly, these difficulties seem. to loom large on the way to the reconciliation which the dialogue intended to promote. My particular responsibility as the Successor of Peter for the faith and unity of the Church leads me to invite my brothers and sisters of the Anglican Communion to reflect on the motives and reasons of the positions I have expressed in the exercise of my teaching office. Our shared desire to respond to the Lord's will cannot fail to lead us to a common understanding of the mind of Christ in every crucial aspect of the constitution of the Church.

3. The approach of a new Christian Millennium, with its preparations to celebrate in a snore intense way the mystery of our Saviour's Incarnation, constitutes a unique context forour ecumenical dialogue. In fact, the dialogue with which we are concerned is primarily "directed towards the One who, as the Redeemer of the world and the Lord of history, is himself our Reconciliation": it is the dialogue in which "Christ, the source of the Church's unity, can effectively act, with all the power of his Spirit, the Paraclete".

My brother in Christ, dear friends: may this be the subject of our prayer when we gather together again this afternoon in the Church of Saint Gregory on the Caelian  Hill.

© Copyright 1996 -  Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See