ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS BENEDICT XVITO THE MEMBERS OF THE INSPECTORATEFOR PUBLIC SECURITY AT THE VATICANFOR THE TRADITIONAL NEW YEAR EXCHANGE OF GREETINGSClementine HallFriday, 8 January 2010

Clementine HallFriday, 8 January 2010

Dear Friends of the Inspectorate of Public Security at the Vatican,

At the end of theChristmascelebrations, during which we contemplated with the wonder of faith the mystery of Jesus' Birth, here we are gathered for this now familiar meeting. Welcome to the house of Peter!

I address my cordial thoughts to Prefect Antonio Manganelli, Chief of the Police, as well as to the Vice-Chiefs, Prefects Francesco Cirillo and Paola Basilone, to Prefect Salvatore Festa and to the Officer in Charge, Giuseppe Caruso. With them I greet the Directors and Officers who, at various levels, share the responsibilities of the State Police, the Agents, Collaborators, Chaplains and everyone present. I thank in particular Dr Giulio Callini, Director of the Inspectorate of the "Vatican" Public Security, who has addressed to me words of cordial esteem and good wishes on behalf of those present.

The work carried out every day to keep the public order in St Peter's Square and in the vicinity of the Vatican is particularly important for the mission carried out by the Roman Pontiff. Indeed, it permits the atmosphere of peaceful serenity that enables all who come to visit the heart of Christendom to have an authentic religious experience in touch with the fundamental testimonies of the Christian faith, such as the tomb of the Apostle Peter, the relics of a great number of Saints and the tombs of numerous Pontiffs, beloved and revered by the Christian people.

Thank you for this precious service which you render to the Pope and to the Church! May the Lord reward you for the frequently hidden sacrifices you make for the numerous believers and visitors, and in protecting the Pope's mission.

Commitment and great responsibility in doing your duty is asked of each one of you, but in the eyes of the faith it must constitute a special way of serving the Lord and thus, preparing the way for him, so that the experience lived at the heart of Christianity may be for each pilgrim and visitor a special occasion for meeting the Lord that change's their life.

On many occasions I have noted the cordial care and sensitivity that inspire your service, as well as your fidelity and dedication which are not exempt from the considerable sacrifices they entail. I am sure that they are also the fruit of your faith and love for the Church.

All that you are called to do makes you ever stronger and more consistent in faith and leads you not to fear out of human respect to express it in the context of your respective families, your work and everywhere that you are called to be.

I entrust you and your work to the motherly protection of Mary Most Holy, Mother of Jesus and Queen of every family. May she accept your intentions and strengthen them by presenting them to her Son.

As I exchange with you good wishes of serene prosperity for the New Year I warmly impart the Apostolic Blessing to you, to your colleagues and to your loved ones.

© Copyright 2010 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See