LETTER OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISTO PROF. GIOVANNI MARIA VIANON CONCLUDING HIS TERM AS DIRECTOR OF THE "L'OSSERVATORE ROMANO"

To the Most Illustrious Prof. Giovanni Maria Vian

At the moment in which, after years of generous dedication and of great responsibility, your tenure as Editor-in-Chief ofL’Osservatore Romanoconcludes, I would like to express to you my most sincere gratitude for the love and care that you demonstrated in the fulfilment of this important task.

Called by my Venerable Predecessor,Benedict xvi, to render service in such a delicate and important area for the Holy See, doing so with expertise, you are esteemed for your distinguished professionalism, supported by your exemplary adherence to the Magisterium and by your consistent Christian commitment.

I wish to thank you above all for the valuable cooperation and constant openness that you wished to show me in the effort to promote the implementation of the reforms that I have instituted and that concern, in particular, the field of communication. I am truly grateful for your fidelity in reporting the word of the Pope.

As a scholar of Church history and also through your experience as a Professor of Patristic Philology, you have offered a valid contribution to enhancing the quality of information and giving ample space to those voices that deserve an attentive ear in the ecclesial community.

May the awareness of having spared no energy in the task that was entrusted to you instil joy and peace in your soul, as it fills mine with satisfaction, certain that I may still avail myself of your support in prayer and in counsel.

I am pleased therefore to wish you, most illustrious Sir, all the best and prosperity in the Lord, invoking an abundance of graces and solace upon you and upon those dear to you.

As I entrust you to the special protection and intercession of the Most Blessed Immaculate Virgin, of Saints Peter and Paul, in the hope of copious divine rewards and as a token of my fraternal closeness, I wholeheartedly impart to you the Apostolic Blessing, adding fervid best wishes for Holy Christmas and for the New Year.

From the Vatican, 22 December 2018

FRANCIS

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See