ADDRESS OF JOHN PAUL IITO THE PARTICIPANTS IN THE PLENARY SESSIONOF THE PONTIFICAL COUNCIL FOR THE PROMOTIONOF CHRISTIAN UNITY AND TO THE REPRESENTATIVESOF THE AMERICAN EPISCOPALIAN COMMUNITIES IN EUROPE

Saturday, 17 November 2001

Dear Cardinal Kasper,Dear Friends in Christ,

It gives me great pleasure to greet you, the participants in the Plenary Session of the Pontifical Council for the Promotion of Christian Unity, at the conclusion of your week’s meeting.

In truth and love: these could be the words which express the essence of your study and discussions during these days, as you have sought to take stock of the progress made in recent times in ecumenical dialogue. I hope that my Message at the beginning of your meeting will have confirmed for you that for the Bishop of Rome and for the Catholic Church the movement towards the visible communion of all Christ’s followers is not merely an appendix of the Church’s activity, but an essential feature of her life and mission.

In thanking each one of you for the dedication and competence with which you serve the Church in this delicate task, I wish to encourage you to even greater efforts. More and more it is becoming clear that the world needs the united witness of Christians. In a world that is increasingly globalized, divisions among Christians are more than ever a hindrance to the proclamation of the Gospel.

Upon all of you I invoke the Holy Spirit’s gifts of wisdom and strength, and express my personal appreciation and gratitude.

You are joined here by representatives of the American Episcopalian Communities in Europe who are meeting this weekend in Rome for their annual convention.

Dear Friends, I greet you and thank you for your presence. Among you are a number of young people, a sure sign of hope that the search for Christian unity will be carried on by a new generation of men and women committed to making a reality of the Lord’s prayer: "that all may be one" (Jn17:20). I ask God to pour out upon you his richest blessings during these days of your meeting and visit to Rome. Through you I send greetings and good wishes in the Lord to all the American Episcopalian parishes in Europe. "Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ" (1 Cor1:3).

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See