ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE AMBASSADOR OF THE STATE OF KUWAIT*

Friday, 9 January 1976

Mr Ambassador,

With greatpleasure we accept from Your Excellency the Letters accrediting you as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the State of Kuwait. We appreciate in particular the welcome greetings which you bring to us from His Highness the Amir, Shaikh Sabah al-Salem al-Sabah, and we would ask you to convey our own greetings to him.

You have referred to eternal spirituals values, which it is our mission to defend and promote. These values are in a special way at the foundation of that true peace among men which we ceaselessly proclaim to all, and we rejoice to have from you this further confirmation that our words are heard. If men of all creeds and all nations will devote themselves ever more generously to the care, solace and help of one another, then shall we see the flowering of those moral, civil and economic conditions which will allow mankind to live in what we like to call the “civilization of love”.

The Church for her part will always promote these perennial values, adapting her efforts to the needs of each country. In Kuwait it is our firm intention to continue to offer our assistance in every field which lies within the sphere of the Church’s activity. In this way the Church remains faithful to her divine calling and helps the attainment of men’s legitimate aspirations. We hope and pray that the new year which has dawned upon a troubled world will indeed bring peace and tranquillity, and that your own beloved country may both contribute to this end and enjoy its fruits. As we invoke upon the authorities and entire people of Kuwait abundant divine blessings, we assure you, Mr Ambassador, of our good wishes for the fulfilment of your important mission.

*AAS68 (1976), p.183.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. XIV, p.20.

L’Attività della Santa Sede 1976, p.9.

L'Osservatore Romano10.1.1976, p.1.

ORa n. 4 p.2, 12.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See