ADDRESS OF PAUL VITO THE NEW AMBASSADOROF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA TO THE HOLY SEE*

Monday, 19 May 1969

Mister Ambassador,

It is an honour for Us to accept the Letters of Credence, by which General Suharto, President of the Republic of Indonesia, sends Your Excellency to this Holy See as Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary. We bid you a sincere welcome, and formulate cordial good wishes for the success of your mission.

We have heard with interest the intentions and programmes of the Government of Indonesia, and We cherish the hope that they may be brought to completion and fruition, for the benefit of the people and for peaceful development in the world.

The Catholic Church has an important contribution to make towards the constant progress of the Indonesian people, through numerous works and institutions of education, medical care, protection of orphans and the young. The mission of the Church is spiritual, assisting men to a more abundant life of the soul and mind; but she also ministers to physical needs, because love of God and His service are best demonstrated by the service of man through all the works of charity, both spiritual and temporal. It is always her solicitude to ensure that the Catholics of Indonesia should be the finest citizens of the Republic, actively cooperating in every project for the betterment of the people.

We ask Your Excellency kindly to convey to the President of Indonesia the assurances of Our high esteem and regard, and of Our prayerful good wishes for the Government and people, upon all of whom We gladly invoke God’s choicest blessings and graces. To Your Excellency We offer Our whole-hearted collaboration in the fulfilment of your new duties; and We call down divine favours upon you and your associates.

*AAS61 (1969), p.453.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. VII, p.304-305.

L'Osservatore Romanon. 26 p.7.19-20.5.1969, p.2.

L’Attività della Santa Sede1969, p.232.

ORa n.22 p.2.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See