HORA TERTIA FOR THE ONE MONTH MEMORIALOF THE TERRORIST ATTACKS OF SEPTEMBER 11th2001

PRAYER OF JOHN PAUL II

Thursday 11 October 2001

At the beginning of the Hora Tertia for the one month memorial of the terrorist attack on September 11th 2001, the Holy Father John Paul II pronounced the following Monition:

Brothers and Sisters,Dear Synodal Fathers,one month since the inhumane terrorist attackswhich occurred in different parts of the United States of America,we again recommendto the eternal mercy of the God of our Fathersthe numerous innocent victims.

We ask for consolation and comfortfor their family and relatives,burdened by pain;we invoke strength and couragefor the many who continue their workin the places struck by this terrible disaster;we implore for tenacity and perseveranceby all men of goodwillcontinuing on the paths of justice and peace.

May the Lord remove from the heart of manevery trace of resentment, of hostility and of hate,and open him to reconciliation,to solidarity and to peace.

Let us pray so that the "culture of love"may be established all over the world.

After the Hymn, the Psalmody and the brief reading of the Hora Tertia of the day, a Synod father, H.E. Most Rev. John Olurunfemi ONAIYEKAN, Archbishop of Abuja, President of the Episcopal Conference (Nigeria) and a Fraternal Delegate, H. E. Most Rev. Peter FORSTER, Bishop of Chester (Great Britain), Fraternal Delegate of the Anglican Communion, held a brief Homily.

Then the Holy Father introduced the Intercessions (the Prayer of the faithful) with the following words:

In communion with the Virgin Marywe offer to God the Fatherour unanimous prayerso that through Christ his Sonthe hearts of men on the entire earthmay be infused withthe Spirit of consolationthe Lord who gives life.

The Intercessions were read by:

in English: H.E. Most Rev. Seán B. BRADY, Archbishop of Armagh (Ireland).

in French: H.E. Most Rev. Michel-Marie-Bernard CALVET, S.M., Archbishop of Nouméa, (New Caledonia).

in Spanish: H.E. Most Rev. Roberto Octavio GONZÁLEZ NIEVES, O.F.M., Archbishop of San Juan de Puerto Rico, President of the Episcopal Conference (Puerto Rico).

in Arabic: H.E. Most Rev. Thomas MERAM, Archbishop of Urmya of the Chaldeans, Bishop of Salmas of the Chaldeans, President of the Episcopal Conference (Iran).

in Portuguese: H.E. Most Rev. Francisco VITI, Archbishop of Huambo, (Angola).

in Russian: H.E. Most Rev. Tadeusz KONDRUSIEWICZ, Titular Archbishop of Hippo Diarrhytus and Apostolic Administrator of the Northern European Russia of the Latins (Russian Federation).

in German: H.E. Most Rev. Alois KOTHGASSER, S.D.B., Bishop of Innsbruck (Austria).

After reciting the Our Father and before the Apostolic Benediction, the Holy Father pronounced the following prayer:

O God, Almighty and Merciful,he who sows discord cannot understand you,he who loves violence cannot welcome you:watch over us in our painful human conditiontried by the brutal acts of terrorism and death;Comfort your children and open our hearts to hope,that our time may again know days of serenity and peace.

Through Christ our Lord.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See