GREETINGS OF THE HOLY FATHERTO THEDELEGATIONS OF DONORS OF THE CHRISTMAS TREEAND NATIVITY DISPLAY IN SAINT PETER’S SQUARE

Clementine HallFriday, 11 December 2020

[Multimedia]

Dear brothers and sisters!

You have come for the official presentation of the Christmas tree and the Nativity display in Saint Peter’s Square; I warmly welcome you and I thank you for your presence. I greet the delegation from the Republic of Slovenia, led by the Foreign Minister, accompanied by Cardinal Rodé and the Archbishop of Maribor, and composed of other ministers, ambassadors and distinguished guests. Indeed, Slovenia has donated this majestic red pine, chosen from the forests of Kočevje. And I greet the delegation from the diocese of Teramo-Atri, with Bishop Lorenzo Leuzzi and various civil authorities: the monumental ceramic Nativity scene comes from your land, and specifically from Castelli. This afternoon the inauguration of both of these “icons” of Christmas will take place. Never as in this year have they been such a sign of hope for Romans and for the pilgrims who are able to come to admire them.

The tree and the Nativity display help create the Christmas atmosphere conducive to living with faith the mystery of the Nativity of the Redeemer. In the Nativity, everything speaks to us of “good” poverty, of evangelical poverty, which makes us blessed: contemplating the holy Family and the various characters, we are attracted by their disarming humility. Our Lady and Saint Joseph came from Nazareth to Bethlehem. There is no place for them, not even a small room (cf.Lk2:7); Mary listens, observes and keeps everything in her heart (cf.Lk2:19, 51). Joseph searches for a place suitable for her and for the Child who is about to be born. The shepherds are key figures in the Nativity scene, as in the Gospel. They live in the outdoors. They keep watch. The announcement of the Angels is for them, and they immediately go to look for the Saviour who is born (cf.Lk2: 8-16). The feast of the Nativity reminds us that Jesus is our peace, our joy, our strength, our comfort. But, to receive these gifts of grace, it is necessary to feel small, poor and humble like the figures in the Nativity.

This Christmas too, in the midst of the suffering of the pandemic, Jesus, small and helpless, is the “Sign” that God gives to the world (cf.Lk2:12). An enchanting image, as theLetter on the Nativity scenethatI signed a year ago in Grecciobegins. It will be good for us to reread it in these days.

Dear friends, I thank you all wholeheartedly! And also those who were unable to be present today, as well as those who have collaborated in the transport and setting up of the tree and the Nativity display. May the Lord reward you for your availability and generosity. I send you my best wishes for a Christmas celebration full of hope, and I ask you to convey them to your families and to all your fellow citizens. I assure you of my prayers and I bless you. And you too, please do not forget to pray for me. Merry Christmas! Thank you.

L’Osservatore Romano, Weekly edition in English, 18 December 2020

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See