CONCLUSION OF THE EXTRAORDINARY CONSISTORY[7-8 JANUARY]

CONCLUDING ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE LEO XIV

Synod HallThursday, 8 January 2026

[Multimedia]

_________________________________

When each of us was created Cardinal, the Holy Father commissioned us to be “intrepid witnesses to Christ and his Gospel in the City of Rome and in faraway regions” (cf.Rite for the Creation of Cardinals). This mission is truly the core, the essence of what we are all striving to do. This Consistory has provided a privileged opportunity to express the mission of the Church, and to do so together, in communion. Over the course of this last day and a half, the Holy Spirit has certainly bestowed generously his manifold gifts. I am deeply grateful for your presence and your participation, through which you support me in my service as Peter’s successor. I am grateful to the older ones among you who made the effort to come: your witness is greatly appreciated! At the same time, I also express my particular closeness to the Cardinals from around the world who, for various reasons, were not able to be present. We are with you and are close to you!

This meeting is intimately related to our experience during the Conclave. Even before the Conclave to elect the successor of Peter, you expressed your desire for us to get to know one another, and for the chance to offer your contribution and support. Our first opportunity was on 9 May. Now, during these two days, we have used a simple — though not necessarily easy — method to help us meet and get to know each other better. Personally, I have felt a deep communion and harmony with all of you throughout the many interventions. We have had an experience of synodality, not as an organizational technique, but as a tool for growing in listening and in relationships. And of course, we must continue and deepen these meetings.

At the end of this intervention, I will bring forward some concrete ideas on how we can continue. But first, I would like to highlight some of the main points that have emerged during these days. Perhaps I can start with some phrases that have come up repeatedly, including during the last session.

The first is finding Christ at the center of our mission. We know well that Jesus Christ is at the center of our proclamation of the Gospel. We want to proclaim his word, and to do so it is important to live out an authentic spiritual life ourselves, in order to be witnesses in today’s world.

The themes that have been chosen are deeply rooted in theSecond Vatican Counciland in the path that we have begun since the Council. We can never emphasize enough the importance of continuing the journey that began with the Council. I encourage you to do so. As you know, I have chosen this theme — the documents and experience of the Council — for this year’s General Audiences. This journey is a process of life, conversion and renewal of the whole Church.Evangelii Gaudiumand synodality are important elements of this journey.

I would also like to say that, at the same time, the other two themes that have been proposed, but were not necessarily central to these two days of encounter, are strongly connected to the other themes and to the Council. They have not been forgotten and will not be forgotten. Cardinal Semeraro rightly recalled the relationship between synodality and the Eucharist. Among other things, a study group associated with the Synodal Assembly is currently exploring this theme in depth. Cardinal Castillo has spoken about the 2028 Assembly. Certainly, the work underway with the Synod Secretariat continues with the study groups.

The path of synodality is a path of communion orientated to the mission, in which we are all called to participate. This is why the bonds between us are so important. You have emphasized the importance of the Holy Father’s connection, in particular, with Episcopal Conferences and local Churches, and the importance of the continental Assemblies. However, these must not become “extra” meetings to add to a list, but places of encounter and fellowship between Bishops with priests and laity, and between Churches, which greatly help to promote authentic missionary creativity.

Now let us take up the other theme: the work of the Dicasteries in the spirit ofPraedicate Evangelium, with their service to the Holy Father and to the particular Churches.Praedicate Evangeliumhighlights the need “to attune the Curia’s present-day activity more effectively to the path of evangelization that the Church, especially in our time, has taken” (I, 3). In this sense, I reiterate my commitment to do my part and offer you and the entire Church a structure of relationships and service capable of supporting and assisting you and the local Churches, so that together we can face the current challenges of the mission with greater relevance and incisiveness.

You have spoken of the importance of formation in order to continue along this path: formation to learn how to listen and formation in a spirituality of listening. In particular, you emphasized the need for this in seminaries, but also for bishops!

Even though it was not a specific topic of dialogue in our meeting, I want to mention the problem that continues to be a real wound in the life of the Church in many places today, namely the crisis caused by sexual abuse. We cannot close our eyes or hearts. I would like to say that the pain of the victims has often been greater because they did not feel welcomed or heard, and I encourage you to share this in turn with the bishops. The abuse itself causes a deep wound that may last a lifetime, but often the scandal in the Church arises from the door being closed and victims not being welcomed and closely accompanied by authentic pastors. A victim recently told me that the most painful thing for her was precisely that no bishop wanted to listen to her. So here too, listening is profoundly important.

Formation is for everyone. The formation of seminarians, priests, bishops, and lay collaborators must be rooted in the ordinary and concrete life of the local Church, of parishes, and of many other significant places where people meet, especially those who suffer. As you have seen here, one or two days, or even a week, are not enough to delve deeply into a topic in order to live it. It is therefore imperative that our ordinary way of working together can become an opportunity for formation and growth for those who collaborate with us at all levels, from the parish to the Roman Curia. An example of an ordinary way to grow in a synodal style would be pastoral visits. All participatory bodies should also be revitalized.

All of this is closely related to the implementation process of the Synod, which continues and will reach an important stage in the Ecclesial Assembly planned for 2028. I encourage you to be the leaven of this journey. It is a journey to carry out the mission of the Church, a journey in the service of proclaiming the Gospel of Christ.

Dear brothers, these are only my initial reflections on what I have heard from you. The discussion is destined to continue. Once again, I invite you to send me your written assessments on all four topics, on the Consistory as a whole, and on the relationship of the Cardinals with the Holy Father and with the Roman Curia. I intend to read your reports and personal messages carefully and then, later on, to give you feedback, a response, and to continue the dialogue.

I would like to propose that our next Consistory be held later this year around the Solemnity of Saints Peter and Paul. I would suggest that we spend two days together. Later we can consider how to continue these meetings, perhaps for more days, and once a year — three or four days, as some study groups have suggested. A day of reflection, prayer and fellowship, then two or three days of work. But for this year, let us continue in this way.

In moving forward regarding the assistance that I sincerely believe you can offer, let us prepare for the next Consistory in June. I would like to add that if any of you have difficulties due to financial resources, please speak up. I think that I, that all of us, can show a little solidarity with one another, and there will be ways to make this possible, through the support of generous people.

At the conclusion of this Consistory, I would like to reiterate what I said in my homily on the Epiphany: “God reveals himself and nothing remains unchanged. His presence puts an end to that type of melancholic complacency which causes people endlessly to say, ‘There is nothing new under the sun’” (Eccl1:9). This is the hope that is given to us.

It is the hope that we feel compelled to transmit to the world. And in this context, we also want to express the concern we have shared in our dialogues and personal encounters, and also in some interventions in the study groups, for all those who suffer in the world. As we are gathered here, we are not deaf to the reality of poverty, suffering, war and violence that afflicts so many local Churches. They are in our hearts, we also want to say that we are close to them. Many of you have come from countries where you are experiencing violence and war.

We are called to take up this journey of hope for the sake of the younger generations: what we experience and decide today does not only concern the present, but also affects the near and distant future.

This is the hope we experienced duringthe Jubileethat has just ended. It is truly a message we want to offer to the world: we have closed the Holy Door, but let us remember that the door of Christ and his love always remains open!

And now let us pray for one another, as the Holy Father prayed for us on the day he created us Cardinals: “Grant by your grace what human weakness cannot achieve, so that these your servants, continually building up your Church, may shine forth in integrity of faith and purity of spirit” (cf.Rite of the Creation of New Cardinals). And may Saint Peter intercede for us as we seek, in a spirit of collegiality, to serve his Barque, the Church!

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

TheHoly See

TheHoly See