APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO GENEVAON THE 50th ANNIVERSARY OF THEINTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION (10 JUNE 1969)

ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS PAUL VITO DIPLOMATIC MISSIONSACCREDITED TO THE INSTITUTIONS LOCATED IN GENEVA*

Tuesday, 10 June 1969

Gentlemen,

It is a privilege of this country that, by the enduring practice of wise and active neutrality, it has attracted the attention of those responsible for the destinies of peoples in the aftermath of the great world conflicts. This has enabled the city of Geneva to be chosen as the location of an imposing number of international institutions, and has obtained for Us the pleasure of meeting you today.

By your various Governments, Gentlemen, you are accredited to these institutions, and We are happy to greet, in your persons, men who have faith in these international organizations, who appreciate their work, and who contribute as far as they can to ensure its success Allow Us to felicitate you for this.

It is a characteristic of our times, this unusual amplitude attained by international problems and by the organisms which strive to solve them. It may be said of those who, like yourselves, sustain these organisms by active collaboration, that they truly work for the good of all mankind, and that their action merits esteem and respect.

That action is, perhaps, not always appreciated as it would deserve; this is because there is need of a whole new education in international life and activity and because, like any other kind of education, this requires much time and patience. Be them, Gentlemen, the skilful builders of this training! For collaborating as you do, on the international level, is the same as putting concord in the place of distrust; it is therefore the same as working in a positive way towards the construction of that edifice, so fragile, unceasingly threatened, yet so very desirable, which is called peace among peoples.

The Catholic Church appreciates and encourages such efforts; she wishes to be present herself each time that the true good of man is involved; and that is why the Holy See makes it a point to be represented at several of these organisms to which you yourselves are accredited. This fact suffices to prove the high value she attributes to those services rendered to the human community by this work carried on at the international level.

With all Our heart, then, Gentlemen, do We express Our wishes for the success of your activities. May God render them fruitful! May He deign to bless them, as We Ourself bless them in His Name; while We invoke His assistance and His ail-powerful protection upon yourselves, your families, and your respective Nations.

*ORan. 25 p. 4, 8.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See