ADDRESS OF THE HOLY FATHER PAUL VITO THE NEW AMBASSADOR OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIATO THE HOLY SEE*

Tuesday, 27 August 1974

Mr. Ambassador,

We are very happy to extend a sincere welcome to Your Excellency as we receive from you the Letters accrediting you as Australian Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary to the Holy See.

We are grateful for the kind words you have spoken about our own activities in promoting world peace. We are convinced, Mr Ambassador, that your own Government’s efforts, to which you refer, to stimulate trust between nations and to build up universal respect for the dignity of all men and all peoples are a valuable aid to the establishment of peace. The diplomatic ties which unite the Holy See and Australia enable us to help one another in this mutual concern.

We try incessantly to remind all men of the need to help one another in a spirit of brotherly love, and in this way to promote true peace on earth. Such help is not purely a material thing but is a part of God’s plan for mankind. It is within this spirit of charity that we give glory to God and contribute to peace among men.

It was in Australia, a land of which we conserve such affectionate memories, that we said: “Man’s heart is made for God, and there is no full humanism hut in his service”. The service of God through the love of our fellow men—this is the blessing we pray God to bestow on the world.

We ask you to convey to the civil authorities of Australia the assurance of our cordial consideration. On all the people of Australia we invoke copious divine blessings. To you personally, Mr Ambassador, we give the pledge of the Holy See’s cooperation in the accomplishment of your mission, a mission which we hope will bring you spiritual and cultural happiness and satisfaction.

*AAS66 (1974), p.492-493.

Insegnamenti di Paolo VI, vol. XII, p.762-763.

L’Attività della Santa Sede1974, p.248.

L'Osservatore Romano28.8.1974, p.1.

ORa n.38 p.2.

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See