APOSTOLIC PILGRIMAGE TO INDIA

PRAYEROF JOHN PAULIION OCCASION OF THE VISIT TOTHE CATHEDRAL OF THE SACRED HEART

Delhi (India)Saturday, 1st February 1986

Dear Archbishop Fernandes,Dear Brothers and Sisters in Christ,

In the solemn joy of this moment, as I begin my pastoral visit to India and as I consecrate the Archdiocese of Delhi to the Sacred Heart of Jesus, let our first action be to praise and bless our God. Let us glorify him for his love for the world which is shown to us in the heart of his Son. In the human heart of the Son of Mary the eternal love of God came to abide; and through Christ’s human life, and especially through his death on the Cross, the tender mercy of God was revealed.

"For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life" .This is the Good News of our Redemption. This is the saving message of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. This is the Gospel which t have come here today to proclaim to you.

During these days I wish also with you to show my respect and esteem – beyond the limits of the Church – to every person in India. In this too we are impelled by the love of Christ.

O Sacred Heart of Jesus, Burning Fire of Love, have mercy on us and make our hearts like your own.

“Grazie per ciò che seie per ciò che fai”

Lord Jesus Christ,Redeemer of the human race,to your most Sacred Heartwe turn with humility and trust,with reverence and hope,with a deep desire to give to youglory and honour and praise.

Lord Jesus Christ,Saviour of the world,we thank you for all that you areand all that you do for the little flockand all the twelve million peopleliving in this Archdiocese of Delhi,which includes those entrustedwith the stewardship of this nation.

Lord Jesus Christ,Son of the Living God,we praise you for the lovethat you have revealedthrough your Sacred Heart,which was pierced for usand which has become the fountainof our joy, the source of our eternal life.

Gathered together in your Name,which is above all other names,we consecrate ourselves to your most Sacred Heart,in which dwells the fullness of truth and charity.

In consecrating themselves to you,the faithful of the Archdiocese of Delhirenew their desire to respond in loveto the rich outpouring of your merciful love.

Lord Jesus Christ,King of love and Prince of peace,reign in our hearts and in our homes.Conquer all the powers of eviland bring us to share in the victory of your Sacred Heart.May all we say and do give gloryand praise to you and to the Fatherand the Holy Spirit,one God livingand reigning for ever and ever. Amen.

© Copyright 1986 - Libreria Editrice Vaticana

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See