MESSAGE OF HIS HOLINESS POPE FRANCISCONCEDING “ECCLESIASTICA COMMUNIO”TO HIS BEATITUDE GRÉGOIRE PIERRE XX GHABROYANNEW PATRIARCH OF CILICIA FOR ARMENIANS

To His Beatitude Grégoire Pierre XX GhabroyanPatriarch of Cilicia for Armenians

Your election to the See of Cilicia for Armenians is for me a cause of profound joy and I thank you for the letter with which Your Beatitude informed me of it, requestingecclesiastica communio.

I join all the faithful of the Patriarchate in expressing to you my fraternal and cordial congratulations and I implore an abundance of divine gifts for you so that your new ministry may bear countless fruit. When the Lord will give what is good, our land will yield its increase (cf. Ps 85[84]:12)!

Your Beatitude’s election comes at a time in which your Church is facing difficulties and new challenges, particularly, the situation and great trials a portion of the Armenian Catholic faithful are enduring in the Middle East. However, illuminated by the light of faith in the Risen Christ, our gaze upon the world is filled with hope and mercy, for we are certain that the Cross of Jesus is the tree which gives life.

I am confident that Your Beatitude, in communion with the venerable Synod Fathers, and with the help of the Holy Spirit, will be able, with all the wisdom of the Gospel, to bePater et Caput, Good Shepherd of the part of the People of God who have been entrusted to you. The many Armenian martyrs, and St Gregory of Narek, Doctor of the Church, will not fail to intercede on your behalf.

I most willingly grant, Your Beatitude, the ecclesial communion which you request of me, in accordance with the tradition of the Church and with the norms in force.

Entrusting you, as well as your ministry, to Jesus Christ and to the protection of the Most Holy Mother of God, I impart to you my heartfelt Apostolic Blessing, which I extend to all the Patriarchate.

From the Vatican, 25 July 2015

Francis

Copyright © Dicastery for Communication

TheHoly See

TheHoly See